Texans have long stored oil, natural gas and other forms of energy in underground salt caverns, so it's only natural that a Houston startup wants to store wind energy there, too.  The method is in the company's name, Apex-CAES, where CAES stands for compressed air energy storage. The company plans to use electricity at night, when it's cheap, to compress air into an underground cavern. The company then releases the air through turbines to generate electricity when the price is right.  The only thing holding back this 30-year-old technology has been the economics. The difference between the high and low prices in a 24-hour period has not been large enough to generate a reasonable return on the capital investment.  Texas' wholesale electricity market and huge nightly wind resource, though, make compressed air energy storage viable, said Jack Farley, CEO of Apex-CAES. Build enough compressed air energy storage, and Texas would never have to burn coal again, and consumers would enjoy even lower electricity prices, he told me.  "I think you could turn off all fossil-fuel generators in Texas when you wanted to," he said.  Apex-CAES is raising $500 million to build its first facility near Palestine. Located near five existing natural gas storage caverns, the compressed air would spin turbines rated at 317 megawatts, capable of generating 15,000 megawatt-hours of electricity over two days without a recharge. The company, though, would never want to release all the air.  The big opportunity for energy storage companies, whether they use batteries, compressed air or hydroelectric dams, is to keep the electric grid balanced as people turn appliances on and off and while generators ramp up and shut down. Sources of electricity that keep the system smoothed out are called ancillary services, and they earn a premium from grid operators like ERCOT, the nonprofit grid manager that supplies electricity to most of Texas.  ERCOT also pays a premium for responsive reserves, electricity that is immediately available on a moment's notice in case of an emergency. While compressed air energy can't compete with low-priced natural gas or wind in the bulk electricity market, it can compete to offer reliable ancillary services.  Compressed air has both a price and operational advantage over batteries. Salt caverns are cheaper than lithium-ion batteries, and the system can fill the cavern with air while generating electricity. You can't charge and discharge a battery at the same time.  Operators can easily and quickly adjust output to match the needs of the grid - unlike with a natural gas turbine. In many ways, compressed air storage operates like a hydroelectric dam.  "ERCOT uses a regulation product every second of every day. They deploy responsive reserves about eight times per month, every month of the year," Farley said. "We would be there for the grid 24 hours a day, 365 days a year, to balance the system and keep it at 60 hertz."  The secret sauce is Texas' cheap wind power, which during the spring, fall and much of the winter is basically free at night because there is so much of it.  Texas has 19 gigawatts of installed wind turbine capacity and is expected to add another 10 gigawatts by 2020.  The only thing preventing Texas from building more wind, solar and compressed air energy storage is the low price of natural gas.  With prices averaging below $3 for a million BTUs, the electricity business is a tough place to make a profit right now.  Old attitudes are also a problem. Critics of clean energy complain about the intermittence of wind and solar power, and the high cost of lithium-ion batteries. Sure, solar is strongest during the day and wind produces the most at night, but the weather doesn't always cooperate.  The renewable energy sector, though, is maturing, and because tax credits for it are rolling off by 2020, smart people are working to solve those problems.  Farley has identified suitable salt domes and caverns across most of the U.S. Wind and solar companies are building widely dispersed assets so that when weather is bad at one location, it's probably good at another.  Americans are also waking up to the social benefits of converting to renewable energy and storage. Researchers at Carnegie Mellon University have calculated that shutting down coal plants and replacing them with natural gas has saved tens of thousands of lives. Getting rid of coal altogether would save tens of thousands more.  Apex will need a small amount of natural gas to heat the air it compresses to maximize turbine output. But storage facilities could limit natural gas usage to when demand peaks in the summer and winter while eliminating the need for coal completely.  The power sector is undergoing a revolution, and Americans should embrace and encourage startups like Apex-CAES. Just as innovators found a way to produce natural gas from shale rock and produce huge amounts of oil and natural gas,
Black Sabbath bassist and self-proclaimed "crazy cat person" Geezer Butler wants people to stop declawing their cats. The musician has issued a statement via the Humane Society of the United States to urge the passing of a bill introduced by the New York State Senate that would make the state the first to ban the practice.  "New York is one of Black Sabbath's favorite states to perform in because New Yorkers are smart, open-minded, and compassionate," the bassist wrote. "I am particularly delighted to be coming back to the Empire State after learning from my friends at the Humane Society of the United States that there is a bill before lawmakers that, if passed, would ban the practice of declawing cats.  "Many know me as one of the founding members of Black Sabbath, but fewer likely know that I am what you might call a 'crazy cat person,'" he continued. "My wife and I have rescued many cats and we have never dreamed of putting them through an elective, convenience surgery such as declawing.  "Can you imagine having your fingers chopped off at the last bone?" he concluded. "That is what the equivalent is for cats who are declawed. It is dreadfully inhumane! A surge of veterinarians throughout New York support legislation to put declawing in the trash bin of history. I urge lawmakers to remain steadfast in those characteristics I admire most about New Yorkers and support the bill to ban the declawing of cats."  Veterinarians opposing the bill claim they earn between $100 and $500 for each procedure, according to New York Post. Assemblywoman Linda Rosenthal told the paper in November that she hoped to educate lawmakers on the practice. If passed, the bill would join recently enacted animal-friendly laws including allowing dogs in outdoor cafes and a ban on tattooing and piercing pets.  Butler and his Black Sabbath bandmates will be playing New York City later this week as part of their final tour, dubbed "The End." The bassist told Rolling Stone that he had mixed emotions about putting an end to the pioneering metal group, which he helped form in 1968. "It'll be bittersweet," he said, looking ahead to the group's as-yet-unannounced final gig. "I'm glad we're finishing on a high note, but sad that it's the end of what I've known for most of my life."
Preview | Recap  Pistons-Pacers Preview  By NOEY KUPCHAN  Posted Jan 16 2015 9:57AM  Just when it looked like the Detroit Pistons had turned things around, they took a big step back last time out.  The Indiana Pacers are also looking to regroup after letting what appeared to be a couple of easy matchups get away.  Detroit tries to avoid losing two in a row for the first time in almost four weeks as it visits Indiana, where the Pistons have badly struggled but enter Friday night seeking their longest road winning streak in nearly 13 years.  The Pistons scored 94.4 points per game in opening 5-23, but they've averaged 105.8 in winning nine of 11 since releasing Josh Smith - with the first of those victories coming 119-109 over Indiana on Dec. 26. Detroit (14-25), however, reverted to its old ways in Wednesday's 105-94 loss to a last-place New Orleans team.  En route to their lowest point total in 14 games, the Pistons were outscored 58-36 in the first half and trailed by double digits throughout the second. Detroit was outrebounded 47-30, its worst effort on the glass this season.  "That was a bad performance, and we have to make sure it stops tonight," coach Stan Van Gundy said. "We didn't do anything. We didn't rebound and we didn't protect the paint, which were two big areas of emphasis. We brought absolutely no energy whatsoever to the game."  The Pistons haven't dropped back-to-back games since Dec. 19 and 21.  They could like their chances of extending that streak on the road, where they've won six in a row for the first time since March 2007. Detroit hasn't put together seven consecutive road victories since Jan. 18-Feb. 22, 2002.  "We're always a little bit worse at home and we have been all year," Van Gundy said. "Even during the 5-23 stretch we were better on the road. I don't know what that's all about, but we are a much more energetic team on the road than we are at home."  They haven't enjoyed much success in Indianapolis, however. Detroit has lost 11 of its past 12 visits, with the last three defeats coming by an average of 19.3 points.  The bulk of those games, though, came against Pacers teams which finished first or second in the Central Division. The loser of this matchup will be alone in the Central basement.  Indiana (15-25) had won four of five at home - its best stretch there this season - before falling 110-101 to Western Conference-worst Minnesota on Tuesday. The Pacers were outscored 41-26 in the fourth quarter as the Timberwolves snapped a 15-game losing streak behind Mo Williams' career-high 52 points.  Indiana had been coming off a 93-92 loss at lowly Philadelphia three nights earlier.  "It's no fun losing to teams with poor records. It's no fun. But it's a long season," coach Frank Vogel said. "We believe in what we do. We believe in who we have in the locker room."  C.J. Miles scored 22 points against Minnesota and is averaging 19.4 over his last seven home games. He started in place of former Pistons guard Rodney Stuckey, who finished with 13 points while battling food poisoning.  Stuckey scored nine in his first matchup against his former team last month. Andre Drummond had 20 points, Greg Monroe added 19 with 15 rebounds and Brandon Jennings scored 14 to go with 10 assists as Detroit shot a season-high 54.7 percent.  Jennings is averaging 22.3 points over an eight-game stretch, but he's been limited to 12.4 per game and 28.3 percent shooting in his last seven against the Pacers.  George Hill remains out for Indiana with a strained groin.  Copyright 2015 by STATS LLC and Associated Press. Any commercial use or distribution without the express written consent of STATS LLC and Associated Press is strictly prohibited
"The actions of the U.S. warship have threatened China's sovereignty and security interests, jeopardized the safety of personnel and facilities on the reefs, and damaged regional peace and stability," China's Foreign Ministry said in a statement on its website after the destroyer USS Lassen sailed close to the Subi Reef in the Spratly Islands.  The "U.S. side [should] think twice, not ... take rash moves and stir up troubles," China's Foreign Minister Wang Yi warned in a separate statement.  A U.S. defense official said the mission was part of an ongoing global effort to keep international waters open for navigation in the face of "excessive maritime claims." The official denied the U.S. was specifically targeting China.  China says virtually all of the South China Sea belongs to it. Beijing's claims over the group of at least a half dozen dredged islands, one of which includes a recently completed two-mile airstrip, have angered the Philippines, Vietnam, Malaysia, Brunei, and Taiwan, which have overlapping claims in the waters.  Related: China Builds Runway on Reef in Disputed Sea: Pentagon  The Spratlys sit in an area potentially rich in oil and gas reserves.  Along with other island chains in the South China Seas, Beijing claims the Spratlys as part of China's territory and argues that international law grants them a 12-mile exclusion zone. While the U.S. officially does not take sides in the dispute, it also does not recognize the exclusion zone.  "We have been clear that we take no position on competing territorial sovereignty claims to land features in the South China Sea," a Pentagon official told NBC News on Monday night.
Earth's global thaw has reached Mount Everest, the world's tallest peak, researchers said Tuesday at the Meeting of the Americas in Cancun, Mexico.  Glaciers in the Mount Everest region have shrunk by 13 percent in the last 50 years and the snowline has shifted upward by 590 feet, Sudeep Thakuri, a graduate student at the University of Milan in Italy, said in a statement. Located in the Himalaya Mountains on the border between China and Nepal, Everest's summit is 29,029 feet above sea level.  Thakuri and his colleagues tracked changes to glaciers, temperatures and precipitation at Everest and the surrounding Sagarmatha National Park. There, glaciers have retreated an average of 1,300 feet since 1962, the team found. More recently, precipitation (both snow and rain) has dropped by 3.9 inches and temperatures have risen 1 degree Fahrenheit since 1992.  The researchers suspect that the glacial melting in the Everest region is due to global warming, but they have not yet established a firm connection between the mountains' changes and climate change, Thakuri said in the statement.  While Everest isn't the only Himalayan region seeing the effects of climate change, not all of the region's glaciers are melting. The Karakoram Mountains, on the China-India-Pakistan border, are holding steady and may even be growing. But shrinking glaciers in the rest of the Himalayas have drawn significant global attention, because the glaciers provide water and power for roughly 1.5 billion people.  Copyright 2013 LiveScience, a TechMediaNetwork company. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
Just another day at Hamilton City Hall…  The Public Record was ordered to leave a public meeting of the Property Standards Committee today after the City Hall objected to the use of Twitter in the public gallery.  The City says the use of a "electronic device" by a member of the public to post to Twitter constitutes "broadcasting" and is forbidden under new rules. The rules are not publicly available on the City website.  These are the tweets the City Manager's Office says constitute "disruptive behaviour":  Happening now – Property Standards Tribunal hearing on current state of Gore Bldgs. Robert Miles testifying #YHMgov pic.twitter.com/LHCrAX3hrU — Joey Coleman (@JoeyColeman) March 6, 2017  At issue: City order for plywood installation and painting after a Nov 9/16 break-in of Gore Bldgs #YHMgov pic.twitter.com/dTLnD4qJOH — Joey Coleman (@JoeyColeman) March 6, 2017  Robert Miles is a public figure in Hamilton, a Realtor and manager for one of largest property owners in the downtown. The Gore Buildings are located along the main downtown strip of the City, and are of significant public interest.  Coverage of this public meeting is clearly in the public interest, and protected journalistic activity under the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  New City Policy for Broadcasting at City Hall  Hamilton City Clerk Rose Caterini, who directly reports to City Manager Chris Murray, implemented new rules for various committees at City Hall to address Council concerns regarding "eavesdropping" during public meeting.  By "eavesdropping", the City is referring to the recording of public proceedings and posting of full videos of those proceedings.  The new rules state "broadcasting" is only allowed for "the purposes of education or news dissemination". The rules do not define "broadcasting" or what is "education or news dissemination".  Read the draft policy for this committee (PDF) – the final version is not publicly available . The City has now posted the policy on its website.  On February 25, 2015, City Council voted 13-2 to receive – and hence endorse – the Integrity Commissioner Earl Basse's report on the incident involving Councillor Lloyd Ferguson [PDF], in which Basse repeated a claim by Ferguson that TPR engaged in "eavesdropping". Since then, staff have engaged in a pattern of obstruction against TPR. On May 20, 2015, Council reportedly voted in camera to further sanction TPR for "RSS hacking" by linking to the City of Hamilton's RSS feed of public agendas in violation of the City's website terms of use that forbid linking to public documents without the written permission of Council.  City Councillors and the Mayor have taken to calling The Public Record a fake news site.  As I'm no longer media, City Council takes the position that my use of Twitter is "broadcasting" and not "education or news dissemination".  Here's the City's statement on the new rules from August 2016 (and yes, the City Manager actually issues official statements with that font):  Response to Property Standards Committee, Policy respecting the Broadcasting and Recording of Hearings @JoeyColeman pic.twitter.com/NyxSG2MuUT — City of Hamilton (@cityofhamilton) August 30, 2016  The City implemented the new rules shortly after the Ontario Ombudsman ruled a secret meeting of the Election Compliance Audit Committee to be illegal – after I caught the illegal meeting. (City Council is challenging Ombudsman oversight in court, the case will cost over $10,000, at a time of budget crisis, this is a spending priority for Council.)  It was also shortly after the Divisional Court ruled that The Public Record video of another Election Compliance Audit Committee could be entered as evidence in a court proceeding and may supercede Council's version of events in the minutes where they conflict.  Property Standards Committee  Property Standards Committee is an open meeting under the Municipal Act. The City takes the position that because the Property Standards Committee exists under both the Property Standards Act and Municipal Act, the City can ban non-media from recording/broadcasting these public meetings under the Property Standards Act. The City is not imposing any restrictions on City-approved media outlets, the ban only applies to members of the public.  Today's Property Standards Meeting  The Committee met today debate property standards bylaw orders for 1 St. James Place, and the Gore buildings.  The meeting was scheduled at the same time as a Council meeting on the City's proposed Transgender and Gender Non-Conforming Policy.  I was in Council Chambers for the beginning of the Council meeting, and walked over to the public committee room for Property Standards around 10:25 a.m., to grab a copy of the agenda (the City does not post public committee agendas
By By Karen Graham Oct 8, 2015 in Food It is difficult to imagine Thanksgiving without pumpkin pie, but it is just possible that some holiday tables may be without this traditional menu item. However, help is on the way, thanks to our neighbor to the north, Canada. Libby, the country's largest producer of canned pumpkin, says O'Hearn did add, "once we ship the remainder of the 2015 harvest, we'll have no more Libby's pumpkin to sell until harvest 2016." Illinois Governor Bruce Rauner signed legislation earlier this year making pumpkin pie the state pie of Illinois. Of course, Illinois wasn't the only state to be doused with heavy rains. Pumpkin farmers across the midwest suffered crop losses. But many of those farmers have already sought help from Canadian growers. "It has caused everybody to scramble and look to get them wherever they can," said Darrell Theis, co-owner of Theis Farms in Missouri, according to the Theis Farms had about 40,000 kilograms (88,185 pounds) of Canadian pumpkins delivered to them earlier this month. Theis told the Huff Post this wasn't the first time he has relied on Canadian pumpkins. "We're all in it together (and) every once in awhile we have to help each other out," he said. Philippe Quinn, owner of Quinn Farms near Montreal said, "I wouldn't be surprised that there will be some loads coming in from Ontario, maybe a little bit from Quebec." Like many Let's insert a word of caution before everyone runs to the store to stock up on canned pumpkin. If you are not buying a frozen pumpkin pie for Thanksgiving, then buy only as many cans as you need. Too often, canned pumpkin get thrown out of donated to food banks because people buy too much. As far as jack-o-lanterns go, buy a pumpkin at the local farmers market, or better yet, take the kids and go to a pumpkin patch and find your own perfect Halloween pumpkin. And don't forget, if pumpkin really does run out, there is always sweet potato pie, which by the way, is delicious. About 90 percent of pumpkins grown in the U.S. are grown in the state of Illinois, within a 90-mile radius of Peoria. But according to the Chicago Tribune , a record spring rainfall washed out 50 to 60 percent of the crop.Libby, the country's largest producer of canned pumpkin, says supplies may be off as much as one-third this year. Before anyone panics, the company has a bit of good news. Roz O'Hearn, Libby's corporate and brand affairs director, says the company is "confident it will have enough pumpkin for autumn holidays."O'Hearn did add, "once we ship the remainder of the 2015 harvest, we'll have no more Libby's pumpkin to sell until harvest 2016." Illinois Governor Bruce Rauner signed legislation earlier this year making pumpkin pie the state pie of Illinois.Of course, Illinois wasn't the only state to be doused with heavy rains. Pumpkin farmers across the midwest suffered crop losses. But many of those farmers have already sought help from Canadian growers. "It has caused everybody to scramble and look to get them wherever they can," said Darrell Theis, co-owner of Theis Farms in Missouri, according to the Huffington Post Canada Theis Farms had about 40,000 kilograms (88,185 pounds) of Canadian pumpkins delivered to them earlier this month. Theis told the Huff Post this wasn't the first time he has relied on Canadian pumpkins. "We're all in it together (and) every once in awhile we have to help each other out," he said.Philippe Quinn, owner of Quinn Farms near Montreal said, "I wouldn't be surprised that there will be some loads coming in from Ontario, maybe a little bit from Quebec." Like many Canadian pumpkin growers , Quinn has had a good season, according to the Star. Canadian farms grew nearly 65,000 tons of pumpkins last year, with almost half grown in Ontario, followed by Quebec and British Columbia.Let's insert a word of caution before everyone runs to the store to stock up on canned pumpkin. If you are not buying a frozen pumpkin pie for Thanksgiving, then buy only as many cans as you need. Too often, canned pumpkin get thrown out of donated to food banks because people buy too much.As far as jack-o-lanterns go, buy a pumpkin at the local farmers market, or better yet, take the kids and go to a pumpkin patch and find your own perfect Halloween pumpkin. And don't forget, if pumpkin really does run out, there is always sweet potato pie, which by the way, is delicious. More about pumpkin shortage, canada comes to the rescue, Heavy rains, half of crop lost, pumpkin pies More news from pumpkin shortage canada comes to the ... Heavy rains half of crop lost pumpkin pies
Hebrews 1 New International Version (NIV)  God's Final Word: His Son  1 In the past God spoke to our ancestors through the prophets at many times and in various ways, 2 but in these last days he has spoken to us by his Son, whom he appointed heir of all things, and through whom also he made the universe. 3 The Son is the radiance of God's glory and the exact representation of his being, sustaining all things by his powerful word. After he had provided purification for sins, he sat down at the right hand of the Majesty in heaven. 4 So he became as much superior to the angels as the name he has inherited is superior to theirs.  The Son Superior to Angels  5 For to which of the angels did God ever say,  "You are my Son;  today I have become your Father" ?  Or again,  "I will be his Father,  and he will be my Son" ?  6 And again, when God brings his firstborn into the world, he says,  "Let all God's angels worship him."  7 In speaking of the angels he says,  "He makes his angels spirits,  and his servants flames of fire."  8 But about the Son he says,  "Your throne, O God, will last for ever and ever;  a scepter of justice will be the scepter of your kingdom.  9 You have loved righteousness and hated wickedness;  therefore God, your God, has set you above your companions  by anointing you with the oil of joy."  10 He also says,  "In the beginning, Lord, you laid the foundations of the earth,  and the heavens are the work of your hands.  11 They will perish, but you remain;  they will all wear out like a garment.  12 You will roll them up like a robe;  like a garment they will be changed.  But you remain the same,  and your years will never end."  13 To which of the angels did God ever say,  "Sit at my right hand  until I make your enemies  a footstool for your feet" ?  14 Are not all angels ministering spirits sent to serve those who will inherit salvation?
On Friday morning, before Donald Trump's campaign rally in Green Bay, Wisconsin, the speaker of the Wisconsin State Assembly, Robin Vos, posted an op-ed greeting him with the words, "Welcome to Wisconsin, Mr. Trump, but let's get something straight - we are Ryan Republicans here in Wisconsin, not Trump Republicans."  Vos went on to say of Trump, "I'm embarrassed that he's leading our ticket," in the opinion piece posted on RightWisconsin.com. The Assembly speaker objects in particular to Trump's unwillingness to endorse Ryan before the Wisconsin primary, which is Tuesday. Ryan does not appear to be in much danger of losing the primary -- he's popular not only in his district, but also statewide.  Still, Vos slammed Trump for his "kind words" for Paul Ryan's primary opponent, Paul Nehlen, declaring that "it revealed a lack of judgement [SIC] from our nominee that I just cannot look away from or forgive."  Trump tweeted this earlier in the week, after Nehlen had praised Trump.  Thanks to @pnehlen for your kind words, very much appreciated. -- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) August 1, 2016   Vos called on Trump to admit he'd made a mistake in "supporting a bigot like Paul Nehlen, who said we should ban a religion." Trump has not endorsed Nehlen. And of Ryan, Trump said that he's "not there yet" on an endorsement, an echo of Ryan, who had said the same thing when he didn't immediately endorse Trump, once he had clinched the GOP nomination.  The top Republicans in the state are all skipping the Trump rally Friday. Gov. Scott Walker, according to the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, will be touring flood damage in the northern part of the state, while Paul Ryan will be in his district, and Sen. Ron Johnson cited "prior commitments," according to the Journal Sentinel.  Their lack of participation isn't surprising -- Ted Cruz walloped Trump in the Wisconsin primary and the statement Trump issued after his loss insulted the winner, the governor and the state's Republicans. "Lyin' Ted Cruz had the Governor of Wisconsin, many conservative talk radio show hosts, and the entire party apparatus behind him," the campaign's statement that night read.  Walker's eventual endorsement of Trump was a tepid one, and after Trump withheld his endorsement of Ryan, Walker immediately tweeted that he stood with Ryan.  We stand with Paul Ryan! pic.twitter.com/O16vThk5dA — Scott Walker (@ScottWalker) August 3, 2016   On Thursday, Walker expressed frustration with the GOP nominee's messaging, as stories about Trump's remarks about the parents of Capt. Humayun Khan continued to dominate the news.  "What's frustrating to me is I wish Donald Trump would just talk about Hillary Clinton, and what he's going to do to make everyday Americans' lives better," Walker told WISN's "Jay Weber Show."  Walker also made it clear he's not with Trump on his comments about the Khans. "I will never question a Gold Star family on anything," Walker said. "They deserve our respect." Johnson has explicitly called on Trump to apologize to the Khan family.
Leonardo DiCaprio is one of Hollywood's brightest stars, so it makes sense that his one-time Malibu home was fit for a king.The private property includes three separate buildings — a 4-bedroom main house, a 2-bedroom guesthouse, and a loft with an extra bedroom, a gym, and an office. We would expect nothing less for the Wolf of Wall Street. Here's your sneak peek at his summer retreat.
UniQure's Shares Rise on Early Gene Therapy Data For Hemophilia  Xconomy National —  There are a slew of gene therapy companies trying to develop a long-lasting, perhaps even permanent treatment for hemophilia. The proof that these companies can really make an impact on the disease will come out in dribs and drabs from clinical trials over the next several years, and today, one of them, Dutch firm UniQure, did so with some promising early results.  UniQure (NASDAQ: QURE) this morning presented results from an early study of AMT-060, a gene therapy it's developing for patients with hemophilia B. To be clear, these are numbers from just the first handful of patients in UniQure's study, treated with a low dose of the gene therapy. And they're early—the patient treated the longest is now 20 weeks post-treatment. For gene therapy to become a viable option for hemophilia, the effects will have to hold up for a long period of time, stop the dangerous, spontaneous bleeds that patients can suffer, and eliminate the need for frequent infusions of the recombinant factors that patients have to take to clot their blood.  But the early results are the kind that can make a meaningful impact if they continue to hold up. The first two hemophilia patients treated with AMT-060, about 12 and 20 weeks after treatment, are now producing 4.5 percent and 5.5 percent, respectively, of normal Factor IX. To put that in context, these patients have severe or moderately severe hemophilia, meaning they typically produce less than 1 to 2 percent of these levels, and rely on frequent infusions to get those numbers up.  Shares of UniQure jumped about 12 percent in pre-market trading on Thursday.  Bumping those Factor IX figures up by a few percentage points might not seem like a big deal, but getting a patient to produce even 5 to 10 percent of their normal levels of clotting factor can turn a severe case of hemophilia into a mild one, or significantly lower the risk of a spontaneous bleed. As ex-UniQure CEO Jorn Aldag told Xconomy last year: "We believe that if you exceed 5 percent, you have a drug." (Aldag stepped down in December, leading many to speculate UniQure was preparing to deliver bad news on AMT-060).  Indeed, the study most point to as proof of gene therapy's potential in hemophilia, run by academic groups at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital and University College London, helped a small number of patients significantly reduce bleeding events. To that end, UniQure said that four of the five patients treated with a low dose of AMT-060 to date have stopped taking recombinant factor IX.  "Thus far, the overall tolerability and Factor IX expression profile in the low-dose cohort is encouraging for patients with hemophilia B and support the continuation of the study," said study investigator Frank Leebeek, of the Erasmus Medical Center in Rotterdam, in a statement.  There are caveats here, of course. As has been seen with Bluebird Bio (NASDAQ: BLUE) over the past year, more patients with different characteristics can lead to variable results. Some patients given Bluebird's gene therapy for beta-thalassemia have responded better than others. Similarly, it's unclear who will and won't respond to AMT-060 in the future, and how long those effects will last. UniQure also said that the first patient given the gene therapy had a "mild, transient" spike in liver enzymes around 10 weeks after treatment. This was alleviated after an 8-week course of the steroid prednisolone—a tactic the St. Jude's/UCL group used in its study, the same way Spark Therapeutics (NASDAQ: ONCE) scientific founder Katherine High did more than 10 years ago when she saw a patient's liver enzymes spike in a gene therapy study in hemophilia—but it's worth watching as more patients take AMT-060.  UniQure is one of at least seven different groups developing gene therapy treatments for hemophilia. The others are Baxalta (NYSE: BXLT), Dimension Therapeutics (NASDAQ: DMTX), Spark, BioMarin Pharmaceutical (NASDAQ: BMRN), Sangamo Biosciences (NASDAQ: SGMO), and Biogen (NASDAQ: BIIB). Of the group, only Baxalta has produced early clinical trial results as of yet.  The difference between all of these players is technical, dealing with the types of viral "vectors," or delivery mechanisms they're using, as well as the actual genes being delivered into patients. They're essentially different strategies to bump up levels of clotting factor, or
Even quicker byte count  27 September 2016  Last time, I thought I'd sped up line counting (which both xi-rope and ripgrep use) pretty good. I had two versions (one using POPCNT and being faster on newer machines, and one using old-fashioned bit-hacks running faster on older ones). Along comes the phenomenal Veedrac and sends a PR with a completely unsafe version that nonetheless not only works, but smokes every benchmark competitor by a factor of at least two.  I've never been so happy for being beaten in a performance contest.  Veedrac's code is a tour de force. Pointer arithmetic, array reduction, bit manipulation, you name it. Like my fastest version, it reduces the count in steps, but the highest step increment is a whopping 8K! Not only that, it manages to squeeze the intermediate count for those 8192 bytes into 4 usize s.  Now, how does that work? There's actually a simple trick to it. Apart from using multiple usizes to keep intermediate counts, unlike my solution in words instead of bytes, which allows it to add more than 255 values and combining those counts only when the ~8k bytes have been screamed through. Hyper-screaming indeed.  Apart from using 4 counters in parallel (which complicates matters just a bit), the algorithm is as follows:  Per usize, get the one-bits (via subtraction/masking, as my count did)  Collect up to 255×8 one-bit values by simple addition  combine each two bytes into one short word by shift + mask + addition (this is how it looks like on 64 bit machines, on 32 bit machines, only half the size is used):  byte 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 bytecounts c1 c2 c3 c4 c5 c6 c7 c8 hi masked >> 8 0 c1 0 c3 0 c5 0 c7 lo masked 0 c2 0 c4 0 c6 0 c8 added c1+c2 c3+c4 c5+c6 c7+c8  Now we have four 16-bit entity per 64-bit word that carry numbers. Note that the number of each value is strictly less than 255 which means we can add two of them in a 16-bit half-word without overflow. This is exactly what the algorithm does (if the slice is large enough).  finally, the counts are reduced by our multiply + shift trick from last time, only that we multiply by a value that has one bit set per 16bit instead of per byte (it looks like 0x1000100010001 in hex on 32bit machines, and we get that number portably by dividing std::usize::MAX / 0xFFFF ):  half-word b01 b23 b45 b67 multiplier 1 1 1 1 multiplied b01+b23+b45+b67 b23+b45+b67 b45+b67 b67 shift >> 48 0 0 0 b01+b23+b45+b67  (for 32-bit architectures, we obviously only shift by 16)  Remember we do this by four 64-bit words at once, so each loop iteration counts eight kilobytes. We could in theory save even more by doing the multiply-reduction only every 128 loops (because after that the counts could overflow), but the savings are probably negligible.  Since not all slices are that big, we do another round for 1 kilobyte, sixtyfour bytes and finally single usize s (Note that on 32 bit machine, we need to half the numbers).  In conclusion: A clever way to use the available bits that I did not see before allowed Veedrac to amortize the count reductions with much more bytes counted. No wonder the code is faster.  PS.: I tried reproducing this with much less unsafe code, but couldn't even get close. So the unsafe code stays for now. I have reviewed and tested the code and am confident it will run perfectly fine.
The UESPWiki – Your source for The Elder Scrolls since 1995  Ancestor Glade  The Ancestor Glade is one of several ancestor glades found on Tamriel. It is the only one located in Skyrim. It is so named for being home to swarms of ancestor moths.  It is central to the quest Unseen Visions, although it can be visited anytime.  Related Quests [ edit ]  Unseen Visions: Perform a ceremony to read the Elder Scroll.  Walkthrough [ edit ]  Exterior [ edit ]  The entrance is high in the mountains, above the snowline east of Falkreath, south of Pinewatch. A few paces to the northeast of the entrance, behind a large rock is an old campsite complete with an extinguished campfire, with two pot hanging over it, one contains a salt pile and the other a venison chop. Beside the campfire is an ice wolf pelt, a snow bear pelt, a dead ice wolf, an unowned bed roll and a novice-locked chest. Everything in and around the campsite is marked as owned, and as such taking anything is considered stealing. Although you can skin the dead ice wolf without committing a crime.  Ancestor Glade [ edit ]  The entrance descends into an overgrown passage that leads to a dead end. Another path on the left follows the wall, before crossing a fallen tree, and into another short tunnel opening up to the main cavern. If you have not yet started Unseen Visions, you'll be ambushed by three spriggan earth mothers in the first area of the cave, regardless of your level. During the related quest, there is a wooden gate that will close behind you, as you enter the main cavern, to prevent you leaving prematurely.  Ancestor Glade interior  There are five Canticle trees found within the glade, which appear as trees covered with white and pink blossoms. During the related quest, they can be harvested for their bark. Before the bark can be harvested, you will require the draw knife, which is located by following the path from the wooden gate as it descends several flights of stairs. At the bottom a path passes under several square arches formed by a flat stones being placed atop two upright stones a few paces apart. In the center of an island surrounded by hot springs and shallow water is a strange stone shrine, with the knife in the center of the stone shrine. The knife is only obtainable during the related quest, it cannot be collected beforehand. There is one of the Canticle trees and several yellow mountain flowers nearby.  The remaining Canticle trees are located; The first can be found by follow the outer wall to the left, from the wooden gate. Continuing past this you will find a large pile of rocks against the outer wall with a random potion and leveled potion of magicka on top. There are many piles of rocks, all found against the outer walls and all having items of treasure on top, unless the items have fallen off, so it's worth scouring the ground nearby and at the bottom in and around the hot springs, if an item is missing. From the wooden gate, following the outer wall to the right, you come to another pile of rocks with a medium coin purse on top. Continue following the wall down to the western corner of the glade and on yet another pile of rocks is a random dagger and random enchanted shield. From here your only option is to follow the stream towards the springs. From the shrine, there are stairs to the southwest. These lead up to a flat landing after a short distance and from here the path turns to the southeast. Continue past this to the southwest, passing across several more heated springs to the third Canticle tree, to the west of it is a pile of rocks, with a random enchanted greatsword on top.  Inside the Ancestor Glade  Following the stairs and path up to the southeast, bringing you to the top, with another flight descending from here heading northeast, the path continues with a rock wall on your right and a drop to the bottom of the glade on your left. Eventually you will reach the fourth tree. Following the outer wall beyond this tree will bring you to a pile of rocks with a random bow on top. From the fourth tree another path heads back the other way, to the southwest. More stairs continue climbing further, passing a pile of rocks with a filled random soul gem in a small stand on top of the rocks and on a lower rock below the stand are four loose septims, an amethyst and a silver jeweled necklace. Beyond these is a spring coming out from under the outer wall before dropping over the edge and forming the largest waterfall in the glade. Across the stream is the fifth and final Canticle tree. Just past this, concealed by a fir tree is a final pile of rocks where you will find a
Still loading...  A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S 1 Sprite Pokemon Nature Ability IV's Egg move 1 Egg Move 2 Egg Move 3 Egg Move 4 Ball Stock Notes 2 HP Atk Def SpA SpD Spe M F 3 Mareanie Bold Regenerator 31 X 31 31 31 31 Stockpile Swallow Spit Up Haze 1 0 4 Alolan Vulpix Timid Snow Warning 31 X 31 31 31 31 Moon Blast Freeze-Dry Powder Snow Encore 0 1 5 Stufful Adamant Fluffy 31 31 31 X 31 31 Thunder Punch Ice Punch 2 2 6 Mimikyu Adamant Disguise 31 31 31 X 31 31 4 1 7 Wimpod Adamant Wimp Out 31 31 31 X 31 31 Aqua Jet 0 1 8 Rockruff Jolly Keen Eye 31 31 31 X 31 31 Fire Fang Thunder Fang Sucker Punch 0 2 9 Gastly Timid Levitate 31 X 31 31 31 31 1 0 10 Porygon Bold Download 31 X 31 31 31 31 1 0 11 Magikarp Adamant Swift Swim 31 31 31 X 31 31 1 3 12 Sneasel Jolly Inner Focus/Keen Eye 31 31 31 X 31 31 Icicle Crash Pursuit Fake Out Ice Shard 1 0 13 Beldum Jolly Clear Body 31 31 31 X 31 31 3 0 14 Gible Adamant Sand Veil 31 31 31 X 31 31 Outrage 0 4 15 Gible Adamant Rough Skin 31 31 31 X 31 31 Outrage 1 1 16 Scyther Adamant Technician 31 31 31 X 31 31 1 0 Genderless 17 Jangmo-o Modest Bulletproof 31 X 31 31 31 31 1 0 18 Bagon Jolly Sheer Force 31 31 31 X 31 31 Hydro Pump Dragon Dance Dragon Pulse Endure 2 1 19 Wishiwashi Modest Schooling 31 X 31 31 31 31 Mist Muddy Water Water Pulse Water Sport 2 2 20 Feebas Bold Swift Swim 31 X 31 31 31 31 Haze 2 2 21 Pinsir Jolly Hyper Cutter 31 31 31 X 31 31 0 1 22 Cubone Adamant Lightning Rod 31 31 31 X 31 31 1 0 23 Swinub Adamant Snow Cloak 31 31 31 X 31 31 Icicle Spear Icicle Crash Stealth Rock Fissure 1 4 24 A - Geodude Adamant Galvanize 31 31 31 X 31 31 0 1 25 Deino Modest Hustle 31 X 31 31 31 31 Assurance 1 0 26 Sableye Careful Prankster 31 31 31 X 31 31 Recover Sucker Punch Imprison Flatter 0 0 27 Dhelmise Relaxed Steelworker 31 31 31 31 31 X Absorb Growth Rapid Spin Astonish 2 0 28 Mareanie Relaxed Limber 31 31 31 31 31 X 1 0 29 Mareanie Relaxed Merciless 31 31 31 31 31 X Stockpile Swallow Spit Up 1 3 30 Mareanie Relaxed Merciless 31 31 31 31 31 X 2 2 Genderless 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100  Loading... Loading...  Quotes are not sourced from all markets and may be delayed up to 20 minutes. Information is provided 'as is' and solely for informational purposes, not for trading purposes or advice.Disclaimer Gen 7 5IV Stock Gen 7 6IV Stock Gen 7 Breedables 5IV Stock 6IV Stock Breedables Competitive Pokemon List  A browser error has occurred.  Please press Ctrl-F5 to refresh the page and try again.  A browser error has occurred.  Please hold the Shift key and click the Refresh button to try again.
Further Reading IDC: PC sales drop to levels not seen since 2007 While other market analysts are seeing overall PC sales continue to decline, a new report from Jon Peddie Research (JPR) shows the worldwide market for PC gaming hardware growing faster than expected in 2016.  All told, the market for pre-built and "DIY" gaming-focused PCs (which also includes "upgrades and accessories such as input devices and audio/communication systems") exceeded $30 billion (£24 billion) for the first time last year ($30.346 billion, to be precise), according to JPR's latest report. That's well up from the estimated $24.6 billion (£19.6 billion) market for gaming PCs that JPR saw back in 2015. Back then, JPR projected that the PC gaming market wouldn't pass the $30 billion mark until 2018, meaning the industry has accelerated roughly two years ahead of those old projections.  "The average PC sale is increasingly motivated by the video game use model, which is important to understand in a stagnant or declining overall PC market," JPR writes in explaining its findings. "As basic computing functions become more entrenched with mobile devices, the PC ultimately becomes a power user's tool..."  While Europe and North America still spend the most on what JPR calls "high-end" PC gaming hardware, the Asia Pacific region is now the biggest and fastest-growing market for gaming PCs overall. The £9 billion that region spends on gaming PC hardware is up 9.61 percent annually, thanks to "an entrenched PC gaming culture, large population, and a lack of significant console traction," according to JPR.  Overall, JPR sees the gaming PC market shifting slightly away from the "entry-level" tier (22% of the market, down from 26% in 2015) and toward more powerful "mid-range" systems (35% of the market, up from 31%). The most powerful "high-end" PCs still make up a plurality 43% of the overall market.  JPR hasn't yet released similar numbers for console hardware in 2016. In 2015, though, the market for what JPR calls "TV gaming" hardware was about 15 percent bigger than that for PC gaming hardware. That's a marked change from 2014, though, when JPR estimated that PC game hardware sold about twice as well as console gaming hardware.
Sean Maize, 27, of Royal Palm Beach, is accused of exposing himself and spitting… (Palm Beach County Sheriff's…)  A Royal Palm Beach man is accused exposing himself to a Victoria's Secret employee, according to a Boynton Beach Police arrest report.  It happened Tuesday at the Boynton Beach Mall at 801 N. Congress Ave. at about 6:30 p.m.  Police said Sean Maize, 27, was walking around the store, spitting on the floor and on several fixtures.  "This outraged the sense of the victim's decency," an officer wrote in the report.  An officer brought the employee to a bus stop, where she identified Maize as the man who exposed himself and spit in the store.  County court records show Maize was also arrested on March 25 on an indecent exposure charge.  He faces exposure of sexual organs and disorderly conduct charges and is held in Palm Beach County Jail without bail.
So say you have a beautiful GWT application that uses GSS. Smart developer that you are, you did this using a theme file to easily manage your variables, in order to speed up your coding and ensure visual consistency across your screens. Now it's time to automate things with GWT Theo!  GWT Theo is my adaptation of the powerful Theo set of Gulp plugins to automate theme creation. It has been stripped down a lot and tweaked to meet the specifics requirement of GWT. It will create your Java classes for each set of variables (fonts, colors, sizes, …) and your unique theme file, regrouping all those elements. It will also generate a style guide based on your variables for quick reference . Last but not least, it will facilitate custom icon integration (currently only supporting icon sets from Icomoon).  There's a repository with a working project available on Github and a live application just here. Have a look at the style guide, you will fall in love! This blog post walks you through how to use GWT Theo.  Importing GWT Theo to your project  Let's start by cloning the GWT Theo repository at the root of your application (at the same level of your src repository).  git clone https://github.com/ArcBees/gwt-theo.git  You will then need to update the gulpfile.js in order to match your application's paths. On Arcbees' website, it would look like this :  View the code on Gist.  Once it's done, you can give it a try and run gulp in your terminal in the GWT Theo folder. You will need Gulp installed on your computer. Default files should be generated inside folders specified in your gulpfile.js . The default Colors.java file will look like this :  View the code on Gist.  Using the generated theme file  Once your files have been generated, you can bind the theme with your GSS files. All you need to do is to locate a GSS file you'd like to power-up with your theme, making it possible to use your custom variables inside of it, and providing the theme.gss in it's source.  In my case, my source declaration for my style.gss file is in my AppResources.java file. Don't forget to require the theme in your GSS file, and that's it! You can now use all of your variables :  View the code on Gist.  Custom variables  By default, GWT Theo comes with 3 files for variables : colors, fonts and sizes, located inside the theme-properties folder. You can add more, of course, or remove anything that you won't need. Variables are declared in a JSON file with a default structure looking like this :  View the code on Gist.  global [object] : Definition for this set of variables type [string] : The variable type (this will influence the layout of the style guide) color [option for type] : Used for colors size [option for type] : Used for string variables category [string] : Defines the category, and creates a section in the style guide classname [string] : The class name for the file that will be generated from this set of variables title [string] : ?  : Definition for this set of variables props : Definition of your variables title-* [object, optional] : Everything starting with "title-" will be converted into a title in the style guide. Must be unique ("title-foo", "title-bar"). value [string] : Your title * [object] : The name of your variable value [string] : The value of the defined variable comment [string, optional] : For variable of size type, a comment about that variable  : Definition of your variables  Adding or removing a set of variables  Variables files are loaded from the theme.json file. You can remove or add a new set from here.  Custom icons  Using custom icons in your application is fun, but can be a real pain with GWT. You need to declare a lot of stuff in order to make it work. GWT Theo can help you with that, but it currently supports only one way of doing it.  Generating everything  Select icons from Icomoon. These can be predefined icons from various packs available on Icomoon, or you can create your own by uploading svg files. Once you have made your choices, generate your font (bottom right). Before downloading the package, open the Preferences (top left) and : Rename the font name to "icons" Rename the class prefix to "icon_" Download the package. Extract it. Inside of your GWT Theo folder, create an theme-files folder and paste your extracted icons folder into it. Now, inside
Promotion for fragrances don't have to involve much to be suggestive and to stir the imagination. Forget bimbos rolling on the bed, blinged out couples coupling amourously and lots of skin display; forget long tirades extolling the virtues of precious ingredients and mellifluous emotion. A mere suggestion and a quote from a legendary celebrity saying they found a fragrance to have an influence in their lives is enough. Behold a photo shot by Peter Lindberg for Guerlain's classic masculine fragrance Habit Rouge, genre: (tres) masculin . [translation: Gender: (very) masculine]. Habit Rouge refers to the red riding jacket donned by gentlemen in equestrian days. Of course! And then you have Keith Richards, of Rolling Stones infamous celebrity, reminscing in his memoirs about choosing Guerlain's Habit Rouge as his signature scent [Mick Jagger prefers Chanel Cuir de Russie ]: "One minute no chick in the world. No f*cking way, and they're going la la la la la. And the next they're sniffing around. And you're going wow, when I changed from Old Spice to Habit Rouge , things definitely got better."  ~Keith Richards, 'Life' quote thanks to yum_yum/mua Elena Vosnaki is executive editor of Fragrantica.gr, the leader in fragrance information in Greek, as well as a senior editor for the top english-speaking Fragrantica.com webzine.
Premiere: Colin Devlin, 'Nostalgia'  Irish singer-songwriter Colin Devlin takes a somber look over his shoulder in "Nostalgia," the new single from his second solo album "High Point." The co-founder of the '90s rockers the Devlins plays the Hotel Café on Oct. 3.
The Illinois Green Party plans to hold a state membership meeting on the Southern Illinois University Carbondale campus this Saturday, Sept. 24, from 10 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.  The meeting will be held in the Mississippi Room at the SIUC Student Center, followed by a fundraising dinner at Hunan Restaurant, 710 E. Main St. in Carbondale, starting at 6:30 p.m. Tickets for the dinner are $30 or $15 for persons of low income.  Although some of the meeting will be devoted to party business, both the meeting and the dinner are open to the general public. Members especially encourage the public to attend presentations on the Green Party principles of social justice, ecological wisdom and nonviolence, beginning at 11:45 a.m.  "Stand Up for Social Justice!," a panel on the issues of police violence, criminal justice reform and environmental justice is set from 11:45 a.m. to 12:45 p.m.  Speakers on the panel include Father Joseph A. Brown, professor of Africana Studies at SIU and longtime community advocate for nonviolence, Ajamu Baraka (via Skype), Green Party candidate for Vice-President and founding executive director of the US Human Rights Network, and David Pittman, of the Peoria NAACP Environmental Justice campaign.  "Stand Up for Our Environment!," a panel on human-caused climate change, dimensions of the crisis and solutions is scheduled for 2:45 p.m. to 3 p.m.  Speakers scheduled to appear are Sheldon Schafer, former director of the Peoria Riverfront Museum planetarium and climate scientist, Paula Bradshaw, Green Party candidate for Congress and environmentalist and Brent Ritzel, solar industry advocate, representative of the Solutions Project.  "Stand Up for Peace!," a presentation on "the inconvenient truth about U.S. foreign policy," is set for 2:45 p.m. to 3:15 p.m.  Rich Whitney, former Green Party candidate for Governor, civil rights attorney and longtime advocate for peace will give the presentation.  More information on the meeting may be found at http://www.ilgp.org/ilgp_2016_fall_membership_meeting.
CHAPTER ONE  The Plea  Innocent.  That's what Marine Maj. Mark Thompson declared the first time we met.  He'd been fighting to prove it ever since two young women accused the former history instructor at the U.S. Naval Academy of having sex with them while they were students. One of the women said the 2011 liaison — amid a drunken night of strip poker at his Annapolis home — was consensual and part of an ongoing relationship. The other called it rape.  None of it was true, Thompson said as we sat at a quiet table inside the Hay-Adams hotel bar called Off the Record — ironic, considering how eagerly he wanted The Washington Post to write about the way the military had handled his case.  "They railroaded me," he would say later.  Mark Thompson  At his court-martial, a nine-member jury had acquitted Thompson of the sexual assault charge but still found him guilty of five lesser offenses, including conduct unbecoming an officer, indecent conduct and fraternization.  The verdict devastated him, marring a career and reputation he'd built for more than two decades. On June 3, 2013, the combat veteran was sentenced to two months' confinement in a military prison and fined $60,000, though his jurors stopped short of kicking him out of the service.  But Thompson's story didn't end there — and what happened to him next made it unlike any I'd heard before.  After he'd served his sentence, the government got a second shot to end his career with what's known as a board of inquiry. Three Marine Corps officers were assigned to decide whether Thompson should be discharged for his crimes.  It was at that hearing — in March 2014, at a time when the armed forces were under unprecedented pressure to eradicate an epidemic of sexual misconduct — that something remarkable happened: The board saw no proof that Thompson had done anything wrong and concluded he should not have been found guilty.  The officers had no power to reverse Thompson's convictions, but their ruling was still a momentous victory, saving his job and a generous pension.  It also fueled his desire for vindication, which prompted him to ask a friend to approach The Post on his behalf in late 2014.  And now, at the bar, I listened as he listed all who had wronged him: the accusers, the investigators, the prosecutors, the academy, the military justice system.  He was convincing. Thompson, a divorced father of two, had a dazzling command of his case's intricacies, able to quickly recall obscure details and testimony. He spoke with a slow, deliberate tone, selecting just the right language to illustrate his points.  About the women: "I hardly knew either of them."  About the academy: "It's a system built on nepotism and patronage."  About the Naval Criminal Investigative Service: "NCIS avoided the truth. They hid it when they could."  Despite those assertions, prosecutors had always maintained that their case against him was strong.   Mark Thompson in San Diego in 1988. (Courtesy of Mark Thompson)  Thompson, who'd grown up in a rural Oklahoma town of about 3,000 people, had wanted to be in the Corps since third grade, when a math teacher described fighting for the Allies on D-Day. Thompson enlisted at 17 and served for four years before leaving to start a family, join the Marine Reserve and go to college. He reentered the service as an officer in May 2001, just months before the twin towers collapsed and the Pentagon burned. He stood 5 feet 7 but appeared taller, largely because he looked the way you expect a Marine to look: square jaw, strong chin, crew-cut hair.  Thompson risked his life during deployments to both Iraq and Afghanistan, taking fire on his way to Baghdad and once narrowly escaping an explosive that detonated behind his unarmored vehicle. While serving, he also earned a master's degree in history that led to an extraordinary opportunity: a three-year stint teaching at the renowned service academy.  The tale of his life sounded inspiring, until the day it didn't.  During that first meeting at the Hay-Adams in April 2015, Thompson, now 46, came across as determined, intelligent and, at moments, desperate. Even with the board's decision, he explained, the convictions were unlikely to be overturned because his lone opportunity for exoneration was through a military appellate system that critics have long branded as tough for defendants.  He hoped The Post could bring new attention to his case and, perhaps, uncover something revelatory that would lead to a retrial.  He'd already studied the work of experts who had detailed faults in the military justice system, reviewed accounts of service members wrongly accused of crimes and spent hundreds of hours analyzing the evidence against him — all in an intense effort to clear his name.  I didn't know it
About This Game Open the gate to the egyptian underworld!   Hieroglyphika is a roguelike game completely without text but with pictograms.   You get lost in an ancient egyptian pyramid buried deep under the sand of the desert and full of traps and monstrous beings. Decrypt hieroglyphs to learn spells and to understand the magical nature of artifacts. GAMEPLAY   Fight your way through dangerous corridors down to the deeper levels of the pyramid in a turn-based fashion. Open sarcophagi or kill enemies and you will find loot. Cast the spells of the dead. Defend yourself with ancient shields. Push your enemies into bottomless pits. Or strike them down with enchanted weapons.   There is no hand-holding of any kind. Figure out the mechanics and rules on your own. Be attentive and creative. Find novel solutions to odd combinations of random events. Be an explorer!
These are the facts. At some point, someone somewhere in the US government had an amazing idea: why not build a compressed natural gas (CNG) filling station in Afghanistan? Forty-three million taxpayer dollars later, the city of Sheberghan, in the far north of the country, got its gas station. But, according to the watchdog agency probing Afghanistan reconstruction spending, nobody seems to know — or wants to admit — who signed off on the project or how its costs spiraled so completely out of control.  The whole thing is so strange and wrongheaded that the crazily high price tag — more than 100 times what a similar facility would cost in neighboring Pakistan — is not even the worst thing the Special Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction (SIGAR) found.  Natural Gas? For what Cars?  Even more troubling than the high price tag is that there was no point in building the gas station in the first place. While Afghanistan has vast natural gas reserves, it does not have a sufficient number of cars that run on natural gas, and converting a vehicle literally costs as much as the average Afghan earns in a year.  Had a feasibility study been conducted, somebody probably would have figured this out, but SIGAR found no evidence of such a precaution having been taken.  You might think the Department of Defense (DOD) would want to get to the bottom of this waste of money. After all, the project was part of the Task Force for Stability and Business Operations (TFBSO), which was created by the Deputy Secretary of Defense and reported directly to the Office of the Secretary.  Instead, DOD stonewalled.  "One of the most troubling aspects of this project is that the Department of Defense claims that it is unable to provide an explanation for the high cost of the project or to answer any other questions concerning its planning, implementation, or outcome," SIGAR John Sopko wrote in a letter to Defense Secretary Ashton Carter.  Did the Dog Eat the Records?  DOD's excuse for its lack of cooperation is that TFBSO, an $800 million program, was shut down in March of 2015 and now nobody is around to address SIGAR's questions. That didn't sit well with Sopko, who recently gave an exclusive interview to WhoWhatWhy in which he discussed the staggering amount of taxpayer funds wasted in Afghanistan.  "Frankly, I find it both shocking and incredible that DOD asserts that it no longer has any knowledge about TFBSO, an $800 million program that reported directly to the Office of the Secretary of Defense and only shut down a little over six months ago," he wrote to Carter.  Sopko vowed to continue the investigation to determine "whether any conduct by TFBSO staff or contractors was criminal in nature" — as opposed to just crazily lucrative — for some well-connected insiders.  Related front page panorama photo credit: CNG Pump Nozzle (Andreas Geick / Wikimedia).  Where else do you see journalism of this quality and value? Please help us do more. Make a tax-deductible contribution now.  Our Comment Policy Keep it civilized, keep it relevant, keep it clear, keep it short. Please do not post links or promotional material. We reserve the right to edit and to delete comments where necessary. Related print
Stats Growth Chart HP: Normal ATK: Normal RCV: Normal HP | Attack | Recover vs Level HP | Attack | Recover vs Experience Compare Blazing Maiden, Princess Valkyrie with .. Please Select 100%の力・戸愚呂弟 2体で最強の妖, Ushio & Tora 2nd Player Color Andy Bogard 2nd Player Color Athena Asamiya 2nd Player Color Benimaru Nikaido 2nd Player Color Billy Kane 2nd Player Color Kim Kaphwan 2nd Player Color Yuri Sakazaki 3rd Player Color Chin Getsai 3rd Player Color King 3rd Player Color Takuma Sakazaki 3rd Shinsengumi Unit Capt., Saito Hajime 5 Mechdragon Combo, Demon Hadar 5 Mechdragon Fusion, God Canopus 5-Ore Magic Stone Dragon, Mithril Edge 6聖球・サタンマリア 7th Heaven's Owner, Tifa 80%の力・戸愚呂弟 A member of Squad 13, Rukia Kuchiki 堕転したマギ・ジュダル 切札勝舞のスペシャルデッキ 刃龍喚士・リエト 寄道の親愛神・サクヤ 審美的転生注射, Zazan 師団長, Colt 帰ってきたサイヤ人, Vegeta 万天の全能神・ゼウス=ヴァース 三橋&伊藤【原作版】 三船東のエース・茂野吾郎 不破圓明流継承者・不破北斗 七代目武装戦線副頭・藤代拓海 七代目武装戦線頭・村田将五 快援隊名刺 忍ギガ満 志村妙 志村新八 呪紋の化身 エキドナロココ クリスタル・パラディン クリームヒルト ジャスタウェイ ジュスティーヌ&カロリーヌ ジョイラの使い魔 ジン=フリークス やさしい王様・ガッシュ&高嶺清麿 カイト カオス セラの天使 アクア・サーファー アイランドガチャドラ アラジン【原作版】 アテナの使命・沙織 ガンダー ガッシュ&高嶺清麿 ギガ満助 サウスポーの守護神・アテナ サイバー・N・ワールド サーティワン・エメリット サーティワン・アメリット サーティワン・サファリット サーティワン・愛猫神・バステト サーティワン・トパリット サーティワン・ルビリット サーティワン・ダブエメリット サーティワン・ダブアメリット サーティワン・ダブサファリット サーティワン・ダブトパリット サーティワン・ダブルビリット サーティワン・バステト サンタクロース ザ・ニンジャ ザブゴン ザブシャーク シェル・ファクトリーγ シェル・フォートレス シヴ山のドラゴン シャーマンカーン シャーマンラーン シーファン シンデレラ ゼオン&デュフォー ゼリーエンジェル スサノオ王子 スーパー覚醒マシンゼウス スーパー超覚醒ゼウス コカ・コーラたまドラ コルト隊兵隊長, Rammot コロッケ コッコ・ルピア あざ笑う雪だるま・ジャックフロスト 坂本辰馬 キャシー・クレイジー キューピッド キン肉族超人予言書 キリン 坂田銀時 坂田銀時 �
Watchface "Pinkie Pie Party Watch"  created 01.07.2013, 00:55  Download  Donations very welcome ;)   This watchface has been created automatically,  based on the input of a third person.  I take no responsibility for it's function and image-content.   Attention: Download and installation at your own risk! I don't take any responsibility for damage on your hard- or software.
Offer Info  The Sony Ericsson Xperia Play delivers an immersive PlayStation gaming experience through Sony's 'PlayStation Suite' initiative. The company partnered with game publishers to deliver rich, vibrant eco-system to launch new titles such as EA's 'Need For Speed', 'Sims 3' and FIFA 10, and Gameloft's 'Assassin's Creed' and 'Splinter Cell'. The Android-based smartphone has a slide-out gaming control, with a digital D-pad, two analog touch pads, two shoulder buttons and the iconic four-icon PlayStation keys — circle, cross, square and triangle. It runs on Qualcomm's 1.0-gigahertz chip with an Adreno GPU graphics processor for smooth 60-frames per second 3D gaming. Additional features include a 4.0-inch touch screen display, 5.0-megapixel camera and social-networking tools.  Features / Benefits  Super-fast graphics and dedicated game controls deliver a superior smartphone gaming experience. Combines PlayStation-quality gaming with Android smartphone technology. Top titles from leading game publishers, including Electronic Arts, Gameloft, Glu Mobile and more. Built-in 5.1-megapixel auto-focus camera with video recording. Runs Google's Android 2.3 mobile operating system with access to Google Search, Google Voice Search, Google Talk, Gmail, YouTube, Google Maps and Android Market.  Wireless Band : CDMA 800 / 900.  CDMA 800 / 900. Weight : 175 g.  175 g. Size : 119 x 62 x 16 mm.  119 x 62 x 16 mm. Form Factor : Slide.  Slide. Battery : Talk Time: 8.4 hours. Standby: 17.7 days.  Platform / OS : Android.  Android. Memory : 400.0 MB.  400.0 MB. Processor : 1 GHz Qualcomm Snapdragon S2 MSM8655.  1 GHz Qualcomm Snapdragon S2 MSM8655. GPS : Type: A-GPS.  Type: A-GPS. Bluetooth : 2.1 (A2DP / AVRCP / HFP / HSP).  2.1 (A2DP / AVRCP / HFP / HSP). Wi-Fi : 802.11 b/g / DLNA.  802.11 b/g / DLNA. Browser : Browser Software: Android browser (WebKit-based) with Adobe Flash 10.1.  Browser Software: Android browser (WebKit-based) with Adobe Flash 10.1. Navigation : Touch Screen.  Touch Screen. Camera : 5.1 MP / Flash / Zoom / Auto-Focus / Image Stabilizer / Geotagging / Video Recorder.  5.1 MP / Flash / Zoom / Auto-Focus / Image Stabilizer / Geotagging / Video Recorder. Audio : Music Player: MP3 / AAC / PlayNow / TrackID / Google Music Player. Speakerphone.  Messaging : Text: SMS, EMS, MMS. Chat: AOL / Google / Windows Live / Yahoo. Email: POP3 / IMAP4 / SMTP / Gmail.   Join the Discussion
Diablo 3 Reaper Of Souls Beta Ends Tonight, Patch 2.0.1 Coming Soon By Pete Haas Random Article Blend Diablo 3: Reaper of Souls will end later today. Blizzard is bringing down the beta and Patch 2.0.1 PTR servers at 5 PM Pacific Time to prepare for the official release of 2.0.1.   "At that time, players will no longer be able to log in to the Beta or PTR client, all Beta and PTR accounts (including character information) will be reset, and both our Beta forums and PTR forums will be marked as read-only," Blizzard said today in a new Reaper of Souls Beta and Patch 2.0.1 PTR. You've done an amazing job of testing, and we greatly appreciate all of the feedback you provided during this critical phase of development."   The closed beta for Reaper of Souls began   Patch 2.0.1, however, could be tested by any D3 owner. This free update reworks the Paragon progression system so that it unlocks account-wide bonuses. The Loot 2.0 system results in fewer but more meaningful drops. You're more likely to find items that suit your character. The Normal, Nightmare, Hell and Inferno difficulty levels have been removed in favor of enemies that scale with your level. The patch will also introduce two types of player organizations: small, invite-only Clans and larger Communities.   Blizzard has yet to announce a release date for Patch 2.0.1. All we know is that it's going to be released before Reaper of Souls, which is scheduled to   Patch 2.0 is incoming... couple of weeks! — Joshua Mosqueira (@joshmosq) February 21, 2014 The closed beta forwill end later today. Blizzard is bringing down the beta and Patch 2.0.1 PTR servers at 5 PM Pacific Time to prepare for the official release of 2.0.1."At that time, players will no longer be able to log in to the Beta or PTR client, all Beta and PTR accounts (including character information) will be reset, and both our Beta forums and PTR forums will be marked as read-only," Blizzard said today in a new Battle.net post. "We'd like to thank everyone who has participated in theBeta and Patch 2.0.1 PTR. You've done an amazing job of testing, and we greatly appreciate all of the feedback you provided during this critical phase of development." Reaper of Souls is the first expansion to the action RPG. It introduces a new Crusader class along with a fifth act for the campaign. During their journey to Westmarch, players will recruit a Mystic artisan who can transform their equipment. A new Adventure Mode allows players to find randomized dungeons called Nephalem Rifts. Characters can advance up to the new level cap of 70 and add a fourth passive skill to their loadout.The closed beta forbegan last fall . It featured all of the expansion's content except for the final boss battle. Because it contained so much content, Blizzard kept the test restricted to a small number of players.Patch 2.0.1, however, could be tested by anyowner. This free update reworks the Paragon progression system so that it unlocks account-wide bonuses. The Loot 2.0 system results in fewer but more meaningful drops. You're more likely to find items that suit your character. The Normal, Nightmare, Hell and Inferno difficulty levels have been removed in favor of enemies that scale with your level. The patch will also introduce two types of player organizations: small, invite-only Clans and larger Communities.Blizzard has yet to announce a release date for Patch 2.0.1. All we know is that it's going to be released before, which is scheduled to launch worldwide on March 25th . Blizzard said today that the patch will be along "shortly," while director Josh Mosqueira estimated that it will arrive in early March: Blended From Around The Web Facebook  Back to top
Description  Thank you all for your continued support of Fantastic Frontier! Development for the next big update is still ongoing - Follow us on Twitter and join the official group below to stay updated. Welcome to Fantastic Frontier. An action adventure game where you can fight monsters, fish, gather rare collectibles, hunt birds and more! Loot you find can be used to upgrade your character, buy a home and become a legendary hero! 🐭 If you'd like to support us please like and favorite the game! 🐸 Latest Update Log (Fishing Update): https://devforum.roblox.com/t/fantastic-frontier-1-10-update-log/102831 Check out our Twitter for more info: twitter.com/SpectraboxRBLX twitter.com/gorbachelli Official Group: www.roblox.com/groups/group.aspx?gid=3352883
The United States Embassy in Beijing warned American citizens on Friday not to travel to Lhasa. The embassy said it had "received firsthand reports from American citizens in the city who report gunfire and other indications of violence."  In a meeting in Beijing on Friday, the United States ambassador to China, Clark Randt, urged Chinese officials to act with restraint, "and not resort to use of force in dealing with the protesters," the State Department spokesman, Sean McCormack, told reporters.  The Chinese authorities blamed the Dalai Lama, the exiled spiritual leader of Tibet, for the violence and said the government would maintain stability in Lhasa. "The government of Tibet Autonomous Region said Friday there had been enough evidence to prove that the recent sabotage was 'organized, premeditated and masterminded' by the Dalai clique," reported Xinhua, the Chinese government's official news agency.  The Dalai Lama released a statement on Friday calling on both sides to avoid violence and appealing to China's leaders to "address the long simmering resentment of the Tibetan people through dialogue with the Tibetan people." A spokesman for the Dalai Lama called China's accusations "absolutely baseless."  Photo  The situation in Lhasa represents a complicated predicament for the Communist Party, which is now holding its annual meeting of the National People's Congress in Beijing. Party leaders are already grappling with growing criticism of China's domestic human rights record and its ties to Sudan, which the United States has accused of waging a genocidal campaign in its Darfur region.  In the past China has not hesitated to crush major protests in Tibet or to jail disobedient monks. President Hu Jintao, who is also the general secretary of the Communist Party, served as party boss in Tibet during a violent crackdown in 1989. His support for the bloody suppression of unrest that year earned him the good will of Deng Xiaoping, then the paramount leader, and led directly to his elevation to the Politburo Standing Committee and eventually to China's top leadership posts.  But Chinese leaders may be more reluctant to order such heavy-handed tactics as Beijing prepares for the Olympics. On Friday, different accounts emerged about how the Chinese military police in Lhasa handled the demonstrations.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Radio Free Asia, a nonprofit news agency financed by the United States government, quoted Tibetan witnesses who described police officers firing into crowds of protesters and killing at least two people in the city's ancient Barkhor area. On Saturday morning, Radio Free Asia quoted witnesses who described seeing dead bodies around Lhasa.  Later on Saturday Xinhua reported 10 deaths had been confirmed.  A Chinese resident in Lhasa, reached by telephone, said stories were circulating among local Chinese that soldiers had been wounded and had not been allowed to fight back against Tibetans throwing rocks. Another Chinese man living near the Barkhor area said family members had told him that two soldiers died and that Tibetans were beating Chinese residents with iron rods.  Friday's sharp escalation in violence, and the sense of dread described by several residents, came a day after China's Foreign Ministry told reporters that the situation in Lhasa had stabilized. The protest started Monday when Buddhist monks began peaceful protests against religious restrictions by Chinese authorities. The police arrested 50 or 60 monks, but other protests followed Tuesday and Wednesday as monks in two different monasteries took to the streets.  The apparent epicenter of Friday's protests was the Tromsikhang Market, a large, concrete structure built in the Barkhor area by the Chinese authorities in the early 1990s. "It's chaos in the streets," said a person who answered the telephone at a bread shop near the market.  Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You will receive emails containing news content , updates and promotions from The New York Times. You may opt-out at any time. You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  What actually set off the violence is unclear, as accounts differed between Chinese and Tibetan residents. Monks from the Ramoche Temple, a short walk from the market, reportedly began to march in the Barkhor area. The Ramoche monks intended to protest the rough treatment of monks who had marched earlier in the week, according to a Tibetan rights advocate in the United States who has communicated with people in Lhasa.  When police officers began beating the monks, Tibetans rioted in the Barkhor area, the advocate said. Angry mobs set fire to a police car and a store owned by a Chinese shopkeeper, said the advocate, who refused to be publicly identified for fear of reprisals.  But a Chinese travel agent in Lhasa, reached by
A nature trail leads away from the campgrounds in the center of Reston, Virginia's Lake Fairfax Park. (Fritz Hahn/The Washington Post)  Human beings love being outside — an estimated 8 billion visits are made annually to natural protected areas, a number that's larger than the total world population.  But could spending time in natural scenery also have larger implications for how we behave politically, or how we treat one another?  A new study suggests the answer is yes.  The paper, just out in the Journal of Environmental Psychology, is by psychologist John M. Zelenski and several other colleagues from Carleton University in Ottawa, Canada. In the study, the researchers wanted to test the idea that there's a link between actually experiencing the natural world, and behaving in a sustainable way. "We hypothesize that participants exposed to nature will make more cooperative, and thus sustainable, choices," they wrote.  How do you study this idea? The research design was a series of experiments with college undergraduates, who, in the first of three studies, were asked to watch a 12 minute video. In some cases, it was a nature video — BBC's "Planet Earth," no less. In others, it was a documentary about New York City's impressive — but also quintessentially urban — architecture.  Then the subjects played a game that the researchers called a "fish-themed commons dilemma." In the game, a group of people decide how many fish to catch over the course of a number of "seasons." Players receive 10 cents per fish caught (but it costs 5 cents to travel out to sea to catch them); the ocean initially contains 50 fish; and over seasons, fish regenerate at a fixed rate.  The participants were playing against other simulated fishermen who had been programmed to "behave relatively cooperatively," rather than greedily (i.e., catching too many fish to maximize their profits, but ultimately crashing the fishery).  The results showed, sure enough, that those who had watched the nature video "harvested significantly fewer fish per season." And moreover, the virtual oceans in which they fished supported sustainable fishing for longer. In contrast, those who watched the architecture video harvested more fish early on, going for the money.  "By season 15, 49.09% of the architecture condition's oceans went extinct, compared to 28.57% in the Planet Earth condition," wrote the authors.  In several subsequent studies, meanwhile, the researchers modified the experimental conditions in order to test the strength of the results, a common practice in psychology studies. Thus, in another study, three different nature videos now showed a forest, a pack of wolves hunting, and a destructive flood. The architecture videos, meanwhile, showed an exciting Las Vegas scene and an old rundown house. Thus, people saw both pleasant and unpleasant images of nature and a built environment.  Even so, the nature focused videos once again had the effect of "producing more pro-social responses" in the fishing game. "These effects do not depend on nature's pleasantness," noted the authors.  So why does viewing nature — as opposed to something constructed by humans — seem to have this effect? The authors say they don't know the exact mechanism, though they speculate that it has something to do with "shifting people's preferences from immediate gratification to larger but more distant payoffs."  The study also evokes E.O. Wilson's well-known biophilia hypothesis, which suggests that we have an evolutionary yearning to be in natural environments and among other creatures due simply to where we ultimately come from, back in deep time. The idea here, wrote the authors, is that "we evolved in natural environments and, thus, they still support optimal human functioning."  If nature exposure works to change our behavior and make us more cooperative, there could be considerable implications for environmental campaigns. Thus, the authors suggest that climate change advocates might consider using nature-focused messages, rather than economic or national security framings, to advance their cause. After all, global warming is ultimately an issue of the people of the world dumping too much of their waste into the atmospheric commons, and thus far failing to cooperate adequately on strategies for reduction.  The overall results, the paper concluded, also "suggest that societies might consider investing more in nature."
From Heraldry of the World  FALUN  Province (Landskap): Dalarna  County (Län): Dalarnas län  Additions : 1967 Stora Kopperberg (1952 Aspeboda); 1971 Bjursås, Enviken, Sundborn, Svärdsjö, Vika  Official blazon  I fält av guld en uppskjutande från kant till kant gående krenelerad mur och däröver tre bjälkvis ordnade kopparsymboler, allt i rött.  Origin/meaning  The arms were granted on May 13, 1932 and reconfirmed in 1988.  Falun became a city in 1641 and the oldest seal dates from 1642 showing a mountain with the symbol of copper above a stream and a city wall. In the 1920s the council wanted to adopt arms and the present arms were designed. The arms are a simplified version of the old seal. The arms combine a city wall with the symbol of copper.   Seal from 1642  Proposal from 1931  The arms as shown by Liljeblad, 1878  The arms in the Kaffe Hag album +/- 1935   Literature : Nevéus and De Warn, 1992  Help maintaining Heraldry of the World !
Commemorate over 30 seasons of SURVIVOR with an in-depth look back at the first 30 seasons of the hit reality series!  An audiobook series from Survivor All-Star Rob Cesternino and acclaimed entertainment journalist Josh Wigler
In the instances where caching is being provided, the SharedCacheMap member of the _SECTION_OBJECT_POINTERS structure is an opaque pointer to the SHARED_CACHE_MAP structure. The SHARED_CACHE_MAP structure is used by the Cache Manager to track the state of cached regions, including the previously described 256-KB VACBs.  The cache manger uses a VACB index arrays to store pointers to the VACBs. As a performance optimizations, the _SHARED_CACHE_MAP contains a VACB index array, InitialVacbs, of 4 pointers, that is used for files 1 MB or less in size. If the file is larger than 1 MB, the Vacbs member of _SHARED_CACHE_MAP is used to store a pointer to a dynamically allocated VACB index array.  If the file is larger than 32 MB, a sparse multilevel index array is created where each index array can hold up to 128 entries. Since we are trying to find all the cached regions that may be memory resident, we recursively walk the sparse multilevel array looking for file data.  The _VACB contains the virtual address of where the data is stored in system cache, BaseAddress,  and the offset where the data is found within the file, FileOffset.  Using this information, we can reconstruct the file based on the cached regions found in memory. Prior Research While some recent research made the assertion that the Windows Cache Manager had been largely ignored in memory forensics, this statement was a bit disingenuous.  In fact, there have been a number of research papers and projects that have demonstrated the importance of extracting files (memory mapped/cached) from physical memory.  The first to explore this issue was R.B. van Baar in 2008, when he published a paper, "Forensic memory analysis: Files mapped in memory", in which he showed that 25% of data in memory dumps was attributed to memory mapped files.  He also discussed a number of techniques for extracting file artifacts using both allocated file mappings and unallocated pages. While the paper did not detail the algorithms used in the analysis, we remembered, that Ruud had submitted the code for inclusion in Volatility back in 2008. Looking though the code, we noticed that he focused on a subset of PTEs found when traversing the DataSectionObject. Later that year, a team lead by Seyed Mahmood Hejazi also wrote a paper titled, "Automated Windows Memory File Extraction for Cyber Forensics Investigations", which also discussed the benefits of extracting memory mapped and cached files. Unfortunately, some discrepancies in their pseudo code and images made it difficult to replicate their research.  Their analysis of cached files also seemed to be limited to files that were small enough to be found in the InitialVacbs (1 MB).   In 2010, Carl Pulley created a Volatility plugin, exportfile, for extracting both memory mapped and cached file artifacts that he used to solve the Honeynet Project Challenge 3. In particular, he demonstrated how PDFs and Firefox artifacts could be extracted from physical memory. This was a major step forward as he was the first to actually release code that others could use and evaluate. Thus, we wanted to see if we could augment Carl's work to support PAE kernels and x64 (Shoutz to Carl!). Finally in 2011, another research team re-implemented Carl's work for a Black Hat presentation titled, "Physical Memory Forensics for Files and Cache". The work presented lacked sufficient detail or code to evaluate the effectiveness of their approach. They also demonstrated a clear lack of understanding in a number of their claims. The DumpFiles Plugin The DumpFiles Plugin works by collecting _FILE_OBJECTS from both the handle table and virtual address descriptor tree. Once those objects have been collected, it will proceed to extract all memory mapped and cached regions to a specified output directory. Typical command line usage: $ python vol.py dumpfiles -f <sample> --dump-dir <filesdir>  -S <summaryfile> --profile=<Profile>  This will create a number of extracted file artifacts in the output directory.  These files are named with the following schema: (file.$PID.[SharedCacheMap.offset|ControlArea.offset].[img|dat|vacb]). The goal of the naming schema is to help provide provenance as to where the data originated. Example output names can be seen below: file.1300.0x8704e540.img file.2648.0x868b58e0.vacb file.436.0x8a06ace8.dat It will also create a detailed summary file describing which pages where actually present and which were paged out and subsequently padded with the output file.
One of our MMO readers, Juan Manuel, shared an update on Wilmer Flores who is playing Winter Ball in Venezuela:  Wilmer Flores, fresh off a stint at the conditioning camp with Mr. Barwis, has returned to the Venezuelan Winter League. In his first three games he has 5 hits in 14 at-bats with a home run, two RBIs, and two runs scored with a 971 OPS. Small sample for sure, but he has hit the ground running. Something curious also, last year Flores hit better when playing anywhere but SS. In his first three games he played third base twice going 4-for-8 with his HR, 2 RBI and 2 runs scored, his game at shortstop saw him going 1-for-6. As I said small samples, but I will monitor this the rest of the offseason and see if he continues to produce more at the plate when playing anywhere other than SS.  It's going to be interesting to see how this Flores situation ultimately plays out. Will he be our Opening Day shortstop? Or second baseman? Or will he be dealt?  Flores has been impressing Mets brass with how hard he's working on his agility and fitness during the team's off-season conditioning program in Port St. Lucie.  Sandy Alderson said recently: "I'm one of those people that says put him out there and see what can happen, which is why we played him so much last year."  "I think the issue has always been whether he can play defensively adequately or better," Alderson said. "And a lot of us think he has the ability or the potential to do that."  But then again, I'm wondering if Alderson is just blowing smoke in light of the fact that he continues to work the shortstop market and is reportedly checking in with some teams daily.  Nevertheless, the 23-year old Flores keeps doing what he does at the plate and few doubt he's going to be a very productive major leaguer. 2015 could be his breakthrough season.
7.06 pm: Pakistan says 21 dead in quake, Iran says no deaths yet  In what can only be described as a bizarre situation, Pakistan has reported 21 deaths die to the massive earthquake that struck Iran, while Iran has said that it has reported no deaths so far.  6.20 pm: No deaths reported in Iran so far, says official news agency  Even as Iran's Press TV says 'dozens' are believed to be dead in Iran due to the massive earthquake, the country's semi-official ISNA news agency has said that there are no reports of deaths so far. It has also dismissed an earlier claim by Reuters that hundreds of people are likely to have died in the quake.  This is in stark contrast to Pakistan which has already reported 12 dead from its Balochistan province after the quake. Reports coming in state that the quake has caused roof collapses in Karachi, injuring around 50 people, while Pakistani state radio says more than 1,000 houses are damaged in Balochistan.  6.07 pm: 'Complicated emergency situation' due to distance between villages  Iran's Red Crescent said it was facing a "complicated emergency situation" in the area with villages scattered over desolate hills and valleys, reported Associated Press.  Iran's semiofficial ISNA news agency and others described the quake, measured at least magnitude 7.7, as the strongest quake in more than 50 years.  Iran's state TV said the quake was centered near Saravan, about 48 kilometers from the Pakistani border.  The quake was felt over a vast area from New Delhi to Gulf cities that have some of the world's tallest skyscrapers, including the record 828-meter (2,717 -foot) Burj Khalifa in Dubai. Officials ordered temporary evacuations from some high-rises as a precaution.  A resident in the quake zone, Manouchehr Karimi, told The Associated Press by phone that "the quake period was long" and occurred "when many people were at home to take a midday nap."  Pakistani news channels showed buildings shaking in the southern city of Karachi, where people in panic came out from offices and homes. There was no immediate word on any damage and people were seen standing outside their homes and offices even minutes after the quack rattled various parts of the country.  In 2003, some 26,000 people were killed by a magnitude 6.6 quake that flattened the historic southeastern Iranian city of Bam.  Iran's Press TV has meanwhile retracted its figure of 40 dead, saying that "dozens" are now believed to be dead.  Meanwhile the toll in Pakistan seems to be rising. The latest report via CNBC Pakistan says 10 people have been killed in the Balochistan region of the country.  5.47 pm: State of emergency declared in Saravan, Iran, after quake  CNN-IBN has reported that a state of emergency has been declared in Saravan, Iran. Saravan is located 158 km from Khash, that was reportedly the epicentre of the massive 7.8 quake. Saravan city is the capital of Saravan County, Sistan and Baluchestan Province, Iran.  Saravan is reportedly the location of many attacks, presumably by Baloch insurgents. Notable people who have been killed there include Iranian Judge Ebrahim Karimi.  No details of casualties yet, though there are reportedly accounts of three people suffering minor injuries.  Meanwhile Pakistan's Samaa TV reported that the death toll from quake in its Balochistan province has risen to 7, including 3 women and 2 children. al-Jazeera reporter Asad Hashim tweeted, "widespread damage reported in Mach Khel, Balochistan after earthquake, tho no confirmation on casualties yet"  https://twitter.com/AsadHashim/status/324134658738626560  5.33 pm: Five also reported killed in Kharan district, Pakistan  The toll from the deadly 7.8 earthquake that struck Iran is also being felt in Pakistan. PTI Pakistan correspondent Rezaul Hasan Laskar tweeted that state media channels were reporting five deaths in Pakistan's Kharan district. BNO News founder Michael Poppel tweeted "Unconfirmed reports that hundreds of buildings have collapsed in Pakistan".  This is in addition to the 40 people said to have been killed in Iran.  Kharan district is located in Pakistan's Balochistan province. Interestingly, Pakistan's second nuclear test was performed in the Kharan desert on 30 May, 1998.  5.22 pm: Power, networks down in most of Baluchistan  Iranian State television has reported that power and communication systems are down in most of Sistan and Baluchistan province after the quake. And in case you were wondering about Iran's nuclear facilities, it turns out that they will not face the same fate as Japan's nuclear plant. 
Match summary  England goalkeeper Curtis Anderson saved a penalty and converted one of his own in a shoot-out victory over Japan that sees the Three Lions into the quarter-finals at the FIFA U-17 World Cup India 2017.
After more than a decade of operation, a curious thing has happened to World of Warcraft: It's circled back around on an awful lot of its design principles, not in the sense that Warlords of Draenor is only a hop and a skip away from the game's original incarnation, which is demonstrably untrue, but in the sense that a lot of what has changed over that original incarnation has slowly wound up coming back to the same place.  This is something that I think has been cycling around for a while, due in no small part to the simple fact that designers are people too, and the people designing WoW are big fans of the game's original design without understanding the iterative improvements that happened over the years. Whether or not these changes are good or bad depends on individual taste, but it's educational insofar as understanding why the game is what it is now.  The undoing of badges  I am not a fan of random loot. I'm not a big fan of randomness in general because it takes agency out of the hands of the player and aligns it with the whims of a computer. Random loot is a particular offender, though, because it turns victories from a matter of accomplishing X for reward Y and into a game of accomplishing X in the hopes that you might get reward Y. And since it's random, there's no real way to accelerate or slow it down.  At launch, WoW was all about the random loot, and this posed a problem that the designers understood. Thus began the saga of the badge system, starting in The Burning Crusade with Badges of Justice, which worked well for much of the expansion before becoming vastly overpowered as extremely good equipment could be had for the minimal effort of farming up badges. The system was refined further in Wrath of the Lich King, such that by the end of the expansion a player could literally pick up a full tier set at least by just farming Heroic dungeons.  Cataclysm started to roll this back, Mists of Pandaria went a step further, and now in WoD the idea of currency drops from heroic dungeons or raids is completely gone. Instead, there's the bonus roll mechanic, which is… sort of the exact opposite of a solution to the problem, since if you couldn't trust your luck the first time, you sure as hell can't trust it a second time. The core idea is the same in that it offers a way to adjust your luck, but the implementation is right back to where we started and is just as luck-based as ever.  The daily and the reputation  The Burning Crusade introduced the idea of daily quests to WoW. Wrath of the Lich King was the expansion where Blizzard fell in love with the idea of daily quests as reputation gates, using them for only a handful of factions beforehand. Both Cataclysm and MoP made extensive use of dailies and new factions, and here we are in an expansion with virtually no factions or dailies to worry about.  MoP was a particularly dark time for dailies, not because of the quests themselves but because they were implemented in a fashion best described as "baffling and insane." You had random daily hubs each day. You had to raise your reputation with a faction in order to unlock the justice/valor gear that had normally been purchased straight with no need for reputation, removing what had been an optional element of gameplay (in previous expansions, there was high-end faction gear and there was badge gear, two separate routes). And you could no longer earn reputations through dungeons, so you were forced to gorge yourself on reputations.  Back in the vanilla game, I was hardly the only person who got used to killing undead in the Plaguelands over and over to raise that Argent Dawn reputation. How are you getting your reputation up for a lot of the factions in WoD? Same thing. (In principle, that is; please do not attempt to grind Laughing Skull rep by killing undead in the Plaguelands. It will not work.)  The death of the heroic  It's a matter of public record that I'm a big fan of small-group content. Having fewer people on deck means that every decision is more impactful, every mistake is more meaningful, and every encounter winds up being that much more challenging. So the idea of heroics always interested me, and as World of Warcraft's team got better at designing instances, those instances swiftly became one of my favorite parts of the game. A version of the older dungeon tuned up for higher levels and meant to be repeatable endgame stuff? Yes, please. Take my money. Here, I'll just sign a blank check for you.  Tuning rewards and difficulty has always been a problem, though. TBC arguably had instances tuned a bit too hard, while by the end of WotLK they were far too easy — fun, but mindlessly so. Cataclysm was again too hard for too little
A bathroom is a perfect platform to showcase your designer and innovative skills and go beyond ordinary or limited. QS Supplies are popular for their trendy, futuristic, designs concepts and have in the past come up with iconic ideas like the Arch overhead Shower and the Zen Rock Basin . With these radiator concepts, the goal was to create a future-ready appliance that can make full use of its designer potential in any setting, domestic or commercial while performing its basic function of warming up a room. The designer's craft rises to meet this challenge in every aspect with each radiator getting the thumbs-up from interior decorators that have been made familiar with these concepts. Although a bit heavy on the pocket, these ideas for modern as well as traditional styled radiators are refreshing and are well worth the money you spend on them.
Portland Children's Museum 4015 S.W. Canyon Road, Portland, OR 97221  Share, listen, connect, ask and learn about feelings and emotions.  Through facial expressions, words, movement, art making and other hands-on activities, XOXO: An Exhibit About Love & Forgiveness provides children and caregivers the opportunity to think about and explore feelings through a variety of activities designed to help them understand, appreciate and express their emotions.
Earn miles. Fly United or one of our airline partners before your mileage expiration date. Book now and be sure to include your MileagePlus® number in your reservation. You can also earn miles by using a MileagePlus credit card, staying at a partner hotel, renting with one of our car partners and more.
This week on TADPOG, we talk about Pocky & Rocky 2 for the Super Nintendo.  In This Episode:  What We've Been Playing:  Shout Outs:  Tony  Lord Mike of Perdue  Paul Clewell  Jon Turley  Matt Barger  Jess Dockrey — suggstreetpost.com  Josh Nance  Nicole Nance  Dennis Robison  Ramon Castillo  Kevin Link  masterpeez  Jacob Short  Plugs:  Don't you miss an episode! Subscribe to TADPOG on iTunes.  Find us at tadpog.com or facebook.com/tadpog and let us know what you think of the show.  Call 270-883-2555 and leave us a voice mail. Relevant or not, we don't mind.  Theme Song:
Qatar's ruler Emir Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani has denied accusations that his country funds the Islamic State in Iraq and Levant, telling Germany that his own country is threatened by the armed group.  Last month, a German minister accused Qatar of financing ISIL, and the US has expressed concern that funds from Arab states, including Kuwait, have helped the armed group that has taken over large swaths of Iraq and Syria.  What is happening in Iraq and Syria is extremism and such organisations are partly financed from abroad, but Qatar has never supported and will never support terrorist organisations. Emir Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani  "What is happening in Iraq and Syria is extremism and such organisations are partly financed from abroad, but Qatar has never supported and will never support terrorist organisations," the emir said, speaking alongside Chancellor Angela Merkel.  Merkel said Al Thani had assured her Qatar's security was also jeopardised by the fight against the ISIL and that she had "no reason not to believe what the emir said".  Qatar has long faced criticism, including from neighbouring Gulf Arab states, of using its vast oil and gas wealth to back armed groups across the region.  German Development Minister Gerd Mueller said last month that Qatar was the "keyword" when it comes to IS financing. Berlin then had to apologise to Doha.  Qatar moved this week to regulate charity donations to tackle funding concerns and last week was one of 10 Arab states which agreed to do more to stop the flow of funds and fighters to ISIL - a move which Merkel said was welcome.  Economic cooperation  German and Qatari business leaders also met in Berlin and Merkel said Europe's largest economy appreciated that "Qatar is a strategic investor" that takes a long-term approach.  Qatar's ex-prime minister Sheikh Hamad Bin Jassim Bin Jabor al-Thani has a stake in Deutsche Bank, Qatar has a 17 percent stake in Volkswagen and Qatar Airways has ordered A380 superjumbos from Franco-German Airbus.  Merkel said she hoped cooperation would grow in energy, with "first steps" already taken in liquefied natural gas.  The emir was also due to meet German executives and Economy Minister Sigmar Gabriel, a Social Democrat who has this year put the brakes on sales of weapons to the Gulf state because of concerns over its support for armed groups.  As chancellor of the reigning World Cup soccer champions, Merkel also raised media reports of bad working conditions and fatal accidents among thousands of foreign workers who are preparing the 2022 World Cup which Qatar will host.  "I made it very clear we want good conditions for guest workers in one of the world's rich countries," she said. "The emir told me things will change and they will react to the criticisms."
Not only is it illegal, it is a felony punishable by up to five years in state prison. See M.G.L. ch. 90 section 24B (allowing for a fine of up to $500 or five years in state prison). Note that Attorney Davis is also correct as there are two statutes which cover possession of a fake ID. However, it is within the discretion of the police which crime to charge you with. Obviously the law is aimed at serious criminals, but as a former prosecutor I can tell you I have seen people charged under the felony statute simply for possessing a fake ID they use to get into bars.  DISCLAIMER: This answer is provided in response to a "hypothetical" question and provided for general, informational purposes and does not create an attorney/client relationship. The information presented is not legal advice and may change based additional information and research. It is recommended that you speak to an attorney to discuss your specific legal issues. This is not intended to constitute legal advertising or solicitation, but rather to educate.
Contemporary photo of a cannon and embrasure at Fort Stevens  Quick Facts Location: Washington, DC Significance: Civil War Fort Designation: National Park OPEN TO PUBLIC: Yes  Fort Stevens, now partially restored, was built to defend the approaches to Washington from the 7th Street Pike (now Georgia Avenue) which was then the main thoroughfare from the north into Washington. Originally called Fort Massachusetts by the soldiers from that state who constructed the fort, it was later named after Brig. Gen. Isaac Ingalls Stevens, who was killed at the Battle of Chantilly (Ox Hill), Virginia, September 1, 1862.   By the summer of 1864, the great bulk of Union troops in the east were engaged in siege operations around Petersburg, Virginia. In fact, when Ulysses S. Grant moved south in the Spring of 1864, he stripped Washington, D.C. of many well trained troops to add weight to his offensive. As a result, in July of 1864, there were only 9,000 troops to defend the city, down from over 23,000 the year before. Those that were left were primarily poorly trained reserves. Robert E. Lee was desperate to reduce the pressure on his forces around Petersburg, and so decided to send General Jubal A. Early and about 20,000 troops to strike at Washington which spies had reported was poorly defended.   On June 12, Early began his march north from Petersburg and by July 9, was at Frederick, Maryland, where he demanded and received $200,000 to spare the city. On the same day, Early defeated Union Gen. Lew Wallace at the Monocacy River. In the light of later events, Wallace's defeat after a stubborn fight became a victory for the Union because he was able to delay Early's advance for a day. On July 10, Early encamped at Rockville, Maryland, only 10 miles from Fort Stevens.   Reacting to this threat to Washington, Grant ordering the 25th New York Cavalry, the 1st and 2nd Divisions of the 6th Corps and part of XVIIII Corps to the capital on July 7. Leading elements of these units reached Fort Stevens at midnight of July 10, the same day Early reached Rockville.   Over the following several days, Early probed Fort Stevens and its environs but never mounted a full-scale attack. Union reinforcements had reached Washington and Fort Stevens just in time.   Located atop the parapet of Fort Stevens is a commemorative stone dedicated to Abraham Lincoln. On July 12, 1864, the President stood atop the parapet to observe the fighting and came under fire from Confederate sharpshooters. It is the only time in American history in which a sitting president came under direct fire from an enemy combatant.   In the years to come, many individuals would claim the honor of advising the President Lincoln to come down from the parapet. The most notable was a young officer named Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. His remarks to the president were short and straightforward: "Get down, you damn fool!" Holmes would eventually serve as a justice on the U.S. Supreme Court, 1902-1932.
It's finally here...Introducing a remarkable digital numismatic reference for Conder Token collectors that has twice the utility of a hardcopy of D&H and is available at a fraction of the cost. We have successfully taken the "Bible" of 18th Century British Tokens, Dalton and Hamer's Provincial Token-Coinage of the 18th Century , ripped it apart and meticulously pieced it back together into a restructured, fully integrated digital book . . . adding oodles of info and a multitude of navigational features along the way to create the infinitely more user-friendly Conder token reference, The Ultimate Guide To Conder Tokens: The Provincial Token-Coinage of the 18th Century Digital Quick Reference.  What's in it for the Novice? Everything! It's more than an extremely cost-effective alternative to buying a hard copy of D&H. It provides all of the essential content of D&H and the need-to-know facts about the original reference. Incorporates a discussion on rarity, token composition analysis, collecting tips, value study, and an excellent article on the history of the series courtesy of Professor George Selgin.
The Obama administration's directive Friday that every public school provide transgender access -- or face the loss of federal funds -- drew swift and strong condemnation from conservatives, with one public official blasting it as presidential "blackmail."  The administration's directive -- citing Title IX in telling schools to give transgender students access to all activities and facilities consistent with their gender identity -- effectively touched off a national debate that could well extend into the next president's term and reverberate through the courts.  Texas Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick, speaking to reporters Friday, said his state "will not yield to blackmail from the president of the United States."  "This goes against the values of so many people," he added. "This has everything to do with keeping the federal government out of local issues."  White House spokesman Josh Earnest later defended the letter as "guidance" that was requested by schools across the country and said it "does not add any additional requirements under the law."  He also pushed back on Patrick's comments that the letter was "blackmail."  "This does underscore the risk of electing a right-wing radio host to statewide office," Earnest said, referring to Patrick's talk radio show.  Patrick -- highlighting the impact of a growing debate that has centered on who should or should not use gender-specific bathrooms, but could extend well beyond that -- called this the "biggest issue facing families and schools in America since prayer was taken out of public schools." The guidance could open a Pandora's box of related issues, from whether colleges would be forced to consider gender identity in student housing assignments to how administrators handle preferences for sports teams and locker rooms, and more.  The letter the administration sent to school districts was signed by officials at the Justice Department and the Department of Education. A copy was posted on the Department of Justice's website.  While the letter does not have the force of law, it does warn that schools that do not abide by the administration's interpretation of civil rights under the Title IX law may face lawsuits or loss of federal aid.  "There is no room in our schools for discrimination of any kind, including discrimination against transgender students on the basis of their sex," Attorney General Loretta Lynch said in a statement.  Patrick scoffed at the threat, saying the feds can keep their "30 pieces of silver."  Officials say the letter is meant to clarify expectations of school districts that receive funding from the federal government. Educators have been seeking guidance on how to comply with Title IX, which prohibits sex discrimination in educational programs and activities that receive federal funding, Education Secretary John B. King said in a statement.  "No student should ever have to go through the experience of feeling unwelcome at school or on a college campus," King said. "We must ensure that our young people know that whoever they are or wherever they come from, they have the opportunity to get a great education in an environment free from discrimination, harassment and violence."  Under the guidance, schools are told they must treat transgender students according to their chosen gender identity as soon as a parent or guardian notifies the district that that identity "differs from previous representations or records."  There is no obligation for a student to present a specific medical diagnosis or identification documents that reflect his or her gender identity, and equal access must be given to transgender students even in instances when it makes others uncomfortable, according to the directive.  "As is consistently recognized in civil rights cases, the desire to accommodate others' discomfort cannot justify a policy that singles out and disadvantages a particular class of students," the guidance says.  But Sen. John Cornyn, R-Texas, says the federal government needs to butt out of state matters.  "What the president needs to do is focus on his job and his job is not to intervene in state and local affairs under our constitutional scheme so frankly I think his involvement in this is unwelcomed," Cornyn said. "This ought to be a choice made by local officials at the local level held accountable by their own voters."  The administration also released a separate 25-page document of questions and answers about best practices, including ways schools can make transgender students comfortable in the classroom and protect the privacy rights of all students in restrooms or locker rooms.  The move was cheered by Human Rights Campaign, a gay, lesbian and transgender civil rights organization, which called the guidelines "groundbreaking."  "This is a truly significant moment not only for transgender young people but for all young people, sending a message that every student deserves to be treated fairly and supported by their teachers and schools," HRC President Chad Griffin said in a statement.  Earlier this week, the Justice Department and the state of North Carolina filed dueling lawsuits over the state's controversial "bathroom" law, which had been at the center of the national debate.  In their suit, the DOJ alleged a "pattern or practice of employment discrimination on the basis of sex" against the state
SHOWCASE LIST ! That Bastard Is Trying To Steal Our Gold ! !Anyway! #Archery #killallzombies #monstercakes #SelfieTennis $1 Ride 'n Verlore Verstand </reality> "Glow Ball" - The billiard puzzle game - Arcane preRaise - - Arcane Raise - - Arcane RERaise - .atorb. .hack//G.U. Last Recode 0RBITALIS 1 Moment Of Time: Silentville 1,000 Heads Among the Trees 1... 2... 3... KICK IT! (Drop That Beat Like an Ugly Baby) 10 Second Ninja 10 Second Ninja X 10,000,000 100% Orange Juice 100ft Robot Golf 100nya 101 Ways to Die 1166 12 is Better Than 6 12 Labours of Hercules 12 Labours of Hercules II: The Cretan Bull 12 Labours of Hercules III: Girl Power 12 Labours of Hercules IV: Mother Nature 12 Labours of Hercules V: Kids of Hellas 12 Labours of Hercules VI: Race for Olympus 12 orbits 140 15 defense 16bit Trader 1775: Rebellion 1849 1914: Prelude to Chaos 1917 - The Alien Invasion DX 1931: Scheherazade at the Library of Pergamum 1943 Deadly Desert 1943 Megami Strike 1953: NATO vs Warsaw Pact 1954 Alcatraz 1979 Invasion Earth 1979 Revolution: Black Friday 1bitHeart 1Heart 1Quest 2 Ninjas 1 Cup 200% Mixed Juice! 2064: Read Only Memories 20XX 21 Days 24 HOURS 28 Waves Later 2Dark 3 Coins At School 3 Stars of Destiny 3..2..1..Grenades! 303 Squadron: Battle of Britain 3030 Deathwar Redux - A Space Odyssey 3079 -- Block Action RPG 3089 -- Futuristic Action RPG 35MM 365 Days 39 Days to Mars 3D Arcade Fishing 3D Chess 3D Paraglider 3DF Zephyr Lite Steam Edition 3DRPG 3on3 FreeStyle 3SwitcheD 404Sight 4089: Ghost Within 428 Shibuya Scramble 4D Toys 4Team 5 Minutes Rage 50 years 500 Years Act 1 5089: The Action RPG 60 Seconds! 6180 the moon 64.0 7 Days to Die 7 days with Death 7 Grand Steps, Step 1: What Ancients Begat 7,62 High Calibre 8-Bit Adventures: The Forgotten Journey Remastered Edition 8-Bit Armies 8-Bit Commando 8-Bit Hordes 8-Bit Invaders! 88 Heroes 8Bit Fiesta 8BitMMO 8infinity 9 Clues 2: The Ward 9 Clues: The Secret of Serpent Creek 911 Operator 99 Levels To Hell 99 Spirits 99Vidas A Bastard's Tale A Bird Story A Blind Legend A Bloody Night A Boy and His Blob A Butterfly in the District of Dreams A City Sleeps A Clockwork Ley-Line: The Borderline of Dusk A Crashlands Story: Dev Diary A Day in the Woods A Detective's Novel A Divided Light A dragon girl looks up at the endless sky A Druid's Duel A Dump in the Dark A Fear Of Heights, And Other Things A Fistful of Gun A Foretold Affair A Game of Changes A Golden Wake A grande bagunça espacial - The big space mess A Gummy's Life A Hat in Time A Healer Only Lives Twice A Hole New World A House of Many Doors A Kiss For The Petals - Remembering How We Met A Legend of Luca A Lenda do Herói - O Herói desta Canção A Light in the Dark A Little Lily Princess A Long Road Home A Long Way Home A Mass of Dead A Mortician's Tale a nifty game A Normal Lost Phone A Pixel Story A Princess' Tale A Quiver of Crows A Robot Named Fight A Room Beyond A Rose in the Twilight A SECOND BEFORE US A Shooty Bit A Sirius Game A Sky Full of Stars A Step Into Darkness A Story About My Uncle A Tale of Caos: Overture A Tale of Two Kingdoms A Timely Intervention A Trip to Yugoslavia: Director's Cut A Valley Without Wind A Virus Named TOM A Wild Catgirl Appears! A Wizard's Lizard A-10 VR A-Escape VR A-Gents A-men A-Men 2 A-Train 9 V4.0 : Japan Rail Simulator A.I. Invasion A.R.E.S. A.R.E.S. Extinction Agenda EX A.V. A.V.A. Alliance of Valiant Arms™ Aaero Aarklash: Legacy Abalone Abandon Ship Abandoned Abandoned Knight ABC Coloring Town ABD: A Beautiful Day Abduction Bit ABO MANDO Abomination Tower About Love, Hate and the other ones Above - VR Abrams Tank Abrix for kids Abrix the robot Absconding Zatwor Absoloot Absolute Drift Abstract Initiative Abyss Cave Abyss Odyssey Abyss Raiders: Uncharted Abyss: The Wraiths of Eden ABZÛ Academagia: The Making of Mages Academia : School Simulator Acaratus
In an undercover federal sting made public Thursday, two Bay Area genetic testing companies were found to offer information that is "misleading and of little or no practical use" to consumers who purchase their tests to gain insight into their health risks.  Although Navigenics of Foster City, and 23andMe of Mountain View defended their businesses, they and two other companies were blasted by investigators from the U.S. Government Accountability Office for drawing unsupportable conclusions from the gene samples they analyzed and making health predictions that didn't always jibe with their customers' actual medical conditions.  When one investigator posing as a consumer asked whether her test data implied she was in danger of getting breast cancer, a Navigenics representative replied, "you'd be in the high risk of pretty much getting it," according to a GAO report made public at a congressional hearing Thursday.  The GAO said experts it consulted called the Navigenics' remark "horrifying" because "it erroneously implies that the tests can diagnose breast cancer and could needlessly alarm consumers."  The gene tests, which can cost consumers thousands of dollars in some cases, have come under increasing fire in recent years. Because they examine only a limited sample of a person's genetic makeup, the tests have been denounced as worthless by critics and drawn growing scrutiny from regulators.  Just last month, the Food and Drug Administration ordered Navigenics, 23andMe and three other companies to submit information verifying the validity of their tests, which the agency is considering regulating as medical devices. And two years ago, the California Department of Public Health launched an investigation into the marketing of such tests, saying some companies lacked proper state licenses.  The results of the GAO probe, which were forwarded to the FDA and Federal Trade Commission, are likely to intensify the government's oversight of the industry.  Officials at Foster City-based Navigenics issued a statement defending its business practices.  "Navigenics is approved by state regulators to operate in all 50 states, and provides its services through physicians and corporate wellness programs," the statement said.  "We are confident that we can address any specific concerns raised by the GAO report and intend to issue a more detailed response to the report as soon as possible," it continued.  In its own statement, 23andMe said "the GAO refused to discuss its flawed report with us," and added that "we are confident in our service's accuracy, reliability and value." The company also said it looks forward "to helping to develop a regulatory framework that provides standards and transparency across the industry."  23andMe's co-founder, Anne Wojcicki, is married to Sergey Brin, a co-founder of Google, which partly financed 23andMe.  The two other gene-testing companies criticized by the GAO were Pathway Genomics of San Diego, which recently announced its intention to sell its tests through Walgreens drugstores, and deCODE Genetics of Iceland. Officials with those companies could not be reached for comment.  The GAO, which had concluded from a 2006 investigation that many gene-testing companies were making unsupportable disease predictions for consumers, said it decided to do another investigation because some companies that have gotten into the business recently have been touted as being more reputable.  The GAO's report cited a number of examples where the four companies provided misleading and sometimes contradictory analyses of the DNA samples its investigators submitted.  In one case, Navigenics called a donor's risk of prostate cancer above average, while 23andMe and deCODE considered his risk average and Pathway judged it to be below average, the report said.  In another instance, a donor had a family history of heart disease, the report said, "yet all four companies predicted that she was at average risk for having a heart attack."  23andMe even provided conflicting predictions on the same sample of DNA through two different types of reports it makes available to its customers, the GAO said. In one case, for example, the donor received a report predicting she had an average risk for developing atrial fibrillation — an uneven heart beat — while another report said she had a below-average risk for the ailment.  In explaining that difference, 23andMe said its research reports provide information "that has not yet gained enough scientific consensus to be included in our clinical reports," according to the GAO report. However, the investigators faulted the company for not providing sufficient information "explaining how consumers should interpret the results."  The GAO also faulted Navigenics representatives for encouraging consumers "to make dietary changes such as adopting a Mediterranean diet or eating curry to prevent Alzheimer's disease, claims that cannot be proven, according to our experts."  Contact Steve Johnson at 408-920-5043.  FEDERAL PROBE  Among the report's findings:
JSON data types are for storing JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) data, as specified in RFC 7159. Such data can also be stored as text , but the JSON data types have the advantage of enforcing that each stored value is valid according to the JSON rules. There are also assorted JSON-specific functions and operators available for data stored in these data types; see Section 9.15.  There are two JSON data types: json and jsonb . They accept almost identical sets of values as input. The major practical difference is one of efficiency. The json data type stores an exact copy of the input text, which processing functions must reparse on each execution; while jsonb data is stored in a decomposed binary format that makes it slightly slower to input due to added conversion overhead, but significantly faster to process, since no reparsing is needed. jsonb also supports indexing, which can be a significant advantage.  Because the json type stores an exact copy of the input text, it will preserve semantically-insignificant white space between tokens, as well as the order of keys within JSON objects. Also, if a JSON object within the value contains the same key more than once, all the key/value pairs are kept. (The processing functions consider the last value as the operative one.) By contrast, jsonb does not preserve white space, does not preserve the order of object keys, and does not keep duplicate object keys. If duplicate keys are specified in the input, only the last value is kept.  In general, most applications should prefer to store JSON data as jsonb , unless there are quite specialized needs, such as legacy assumptions about ordering of object keys.  PostgreSQL allows only one character set encoding per database. It is therefore not possible for the JSON types to conform rigidly to the JSON specification unless the database encoding is UTF8. Attempts to directly include characters that cannot be represented in the database encoding will fail; conversely, characters that can be represented in the database encoding but not in UTF8 will be allowed.  RFC 7159 permits JSON strings to contain Unicode escape sequences denoted by \u XXXX . In the input function for the json type, Unicode escapes are allowed regardless of the database encoding, and are checked only for syntactic correctness (that is, that four hex digits follow \u ). However, the input function for jsonb is stricter: it disallows Unicode escapes for non-ASCII characters (those above U+007F ) unless the database encoding is UTF8. The jsonb type also rejects \u0000 (because that cannot be represented in PostgreSQL's text type), and it insists that any use of Unicode surrogate pairs to designate characters outside the Unicode Basic Multilingual Plane be correct. Valid Unicode escapes are converted to the equivalent ASCII or UTF8 character for storage; this includes folding surrogate pairs into a single character.  Note: Many of the JSON processing functions described in Section 9.15 will convert Unicode escapes to regular characters, and will therefore throw the same types of errors just described even if their input is of type json not jsonb . The fact that the json input function does not make these checks may be considered a historical artifact, although it does allow for simple storage (without processing) of JSON Unicode escapes in a non-UTF8 database encoding. In general, it is best to avoid mixing Unicode escapes in JSON with a non-UTF8 database encoding, if possible.  When converting textual JSON input into jsonb , the primitive types described by RFC 7159 are effectively mapped onto native PostgreSQL types, as shown in Table 8-23. Therefore, there are some minor additional constraints on what constitutes valid jsonb data that do not apply to the json type, nor to JSON in the abstract, corresponding to limits on what can be represented by the underlying data type. Notably, jsonb will reject numbers that are outside the range of the PostgreSQL numeric data type, while json will not. Such implementation-defined restrictions are permitted by RFC 7159. However, in practice such problems are far more likely to occur in other implementations, as it is common to represent JSON's number primitive type as IEEE 754 double precision floating point (which RFC 7159 explicitly anticipates and allows for). When using JSON as an interchange format with such systems, the danger of losing numeric precision compared to data originally stored by PostgreSQL should be considered.  Conversely, as noted in the table there are some minor restrictions on the input format of JSON primitive types that do not apply to the corresponding PostgreSQL types.  Table 8-23. JSON primitive types and corresponding PostgreSQL types JSON primitive type PostgreSQL type Notes string text \u0000 is disallowed, as are non-ASCII Unicode escapes if database encoding is not UTF8 number numeric NaN and infinity values are disallowed boolean boolean Only lowercase true and false spellings are accepted null (none) SQL NULL is a different concept  8.14.1. JSON Input and Output Synt
Washington Post Goes Pinocchio Happy Over NAFTA  I appreciate the work that Glenn Kessler does as the writer of Washington Post's Fact Checker column. It's a difficult job. I don't always agree with his assessments, but I think he tries to be fair in his analysis. For this reason I was disappointed to see him max out with four Pinocchios over Donald Trump's trade representative Robert Lighthizer saying that NAFTA led to a government certified loss of 700,000 jobs.  According to Kessler, the basis for this figure is the 757,000 petitions for NAFTA-related trade adjustment assistance that were certified by the Labor Department between Jan. 1, 1994 and Jan. 1, 2001. Kessler raises three major objections to this figure.  First, he argues that the number is old. This is true, but it is difficult to see why that is relevant. There may have been some additional NAFTA related job loss in subsequent years, but that would make the number higher not lower. Complaining that the number is dated would be a bit like criticizing a figure for the number of traffic accidents in 1995. Presumably, there has been no major recalculation of the number of accidents that took place in 1995, so using the originally calculated number would be reasonable for most purposes, even though it is now more than twenty years old.  The second point is that the number could be overstated because the Labor Department was very generous in accepting petitions and likely gave assistance even in instances where the job loss had nothing to do with NAFTA. This is undoubtedly true, but there also had to be many cases where workers lost jobs due to NAFTA, who never filed a petition.   For example, suppose a factory closed in large part due to competition from a Mexican factory. While the factory workers might file successful petitions, would the workers at a restaurant that shut due to the loss of business from factory workers? The certification process is clearly open to errors in both directions. I don't know which type of error would be larger, but Kessler doesn't even consider the possibility that the certification process might have missed NAFTA related job loss.  The third issue is that Lighthizer doesn't take account of the jobs gained due to NAFTA. This is right, but it is not obvious why this makes his statement about job loss false. Kessler says on this point:  "As we have noted before, most mainstream economists do not believe that the number of jobs is significantly affected by trade policy; instead, trade changes the mix of jobs."  This is true, with an important qualification, but it is not clear it responds to Lighthizer. His claim was that workers lost jobs due to NAFTA. If these job losses were largely offset by other gains, the net impact on employment may be inconsequential, but the workers who lost their jobs are likely worse off as a result of the trade deal. (The qualification is that if the United States is suffering from a shortage of aggregate demand, as it did for many years following the collapse of the housing bubble, a trade deficit reduces demand and for this reason leads to fewer jobs in the economy as a whole.)  Furthermore, if NAFTA reduced the demand for non-college-educated workers and increased the demand for college-educated workers, as conventional trade theory would imply, this would mean real losses for those workers without college degrees, which would go along with gains for workers with college degrees. The impact may not have been that large, since our trade with Mexico is not that large (Canada is part of NAFTA, but we already had a trade deal with Canada before NAFTA), but Lighthizer's claim of 700,000 lost jobs is not all that large relative to the size of the labor force (150 million), as Kessler himself points out.  Lighthizer certainly can be criticized for making a bigger deal out the number and the impact of NAFTA than the facts warrant, but that hardly seems a four Pinocchio offense. In short, Lighthizer is certainly hyping the harm from NAFTA and arguably making it a bigger deal than he should, but his basic claims seem right. (I would add that NAFTA could have had a substantial impact on workers' bargaining power by making the threat to move a plant to Mexico very credible.)  Moving away from Kessler's piece, the Post has had an absolute love affair with NAFTA ever since the deal was debated by Congress in the early 1990s. This love affair led to the absurd claim in a 2007 editorial that:  "Mexico's gross domestic product, now more than $875 billion, has more than quadrupled since 1987."  This would have implied a 7 percent annual growth rate. China managed to do this over a two decade period, very few other countries have. According to the IMF, Mexico's GDP grew by 83 percent over this period, which is pretty far from quadrupling.  Incredibly, the Post has never bothered to issue a correction to this editorial. Newspapers typically append a correction in the Internet Age
Just the FACTS  California's Population  During the 20th century, California experienced tremendous population growth …  California is the most populous state in the nation.  California's population is one of the world's most diverse.  … but growth has slowed in recent decades.  More than 10 million Californians are immigrants.  According to 2015 estimates, 27% of Californians (10.7 million) are foreign born—a higher proportion than in any other state (New York is second with 23%) and twice the nationwide share (13%). The leading countries of origin for California immigrants are Mexico (4.3 million), the Philippines (864,000), China (728,000 excluding Taiwan; 910,000 including Taiwan), Vietnam (511,000), India (477,000), El Salvador (428,000), and Korea (328,000). In recent years, almost twice as many immigrants have been arriving from Asia as from Latin America.  California is aging but is young compared to the rest of the country.  California's population is slightly younger than that of the rest of the nation: according to 2015 Census Bureau estimates, the median age in California is 36.2, compared to 37.8 for the entire country. California has the seventh-youngest population in the country (Utah has the youngest). However, California's population is aging along with the baby boom: by 2030, about one in five Californians will be age 65 or older.
Luis Suarez in another bite storm  Everton manager Roberto Martinez has told ESPN that Luis Suarez "needs help" after the Uruguay striker allegedly bit Italy defender Giorgio Chiellini.  Uruguay's 1-0 win over Italy on Tuesday that booked their place in the last 16 of the World Cup was overshadowed by footage of Liverpool's Suarez seemingly biting the shoulder of Chiellini.  FIFA has since confirmed it will investigate the incident that will likely lead to a lengthy ban if found guilty.  A(nother) flawed genius Patience with Suarez is wearing thin © Getty Images Like Diego Maradona and co before him, Luis Suarez is on course to be remembered for all the wrong reasons, writes Rory Smith   Click here to continue reading  Speaking after the match, Martinez outlined his concerns about Suarez's behaviour. He said: "There is no doubt that the quality of the talent that he has.  "He can win games single-handed and he's got that focus, that mentality that he can get back from a situation he shouldn't have derived.  "But the behaviour, I just seriously think that he needs help. If you cannot control yourself in those moments, you need some sort of help because that's just unacceptable on a football pitch.  "This is a behaviour that has happened already two times and Luis Suarez, as a wonderful footballer that he is, has been banned twice. It has been such a controversial way of acting on a football pitch that you see it again and everyone feels upset.  "We can't celebrate [the game]. We can't talk about what Uruguay did. We can't talk about why Mario Balotelli didn't come on in the second half.  "It's about how Luis Suarez is allowed to play the game without carrying that responsibility that you have as a player, being a role model to the younger generation. You cannot justify it."  © ESPN Sports Media Ltd
"Flying" into the Lakeland Linder Airport from Tampa for this event was Ron and Dee Gee and their unique "EXP Airocycle" named "Freedom 1". The vehicle combines the look of a small fighter plane and a motorcycle chassis, and the cockpit has fighter plane style instrumentation, and tan bucket seats for two pilots. The gray plane is painted with a blue nose cone with white stars, and the red and white stripes decorate the sides of the aircraft. This vehicle always draws attention, whether it is parked at shows or "flying" down the highway. BACK
In my last post, I wrote two short stories about two goals that I had in the past that resulted in different outcomes.  The first was on my failure to make the California state track & field meet in high school, and the second was on how I accomplished my goal of getting at least 3-4 top-tier conference papers in grad school.  I should be happy with reaching the second goal. However, in retrospect, I don't feel very good about it. In fact, I mentally beat myself up about it sometimes.  Why?  Because I failed myself in the process of achieving the goal.  Here is how.  Two problems with goals.  Goals can be highly motivational, but they can also have unintended negative consequences. Here are two that I experienced.  First, the goal may shift your priorities, and cause you to optimize for reaching the goal instead of optimizing for what you should really focus on.  In my case, the focus on paper count negatively changed my priorities. Instead of focusing on finding the big problems, I quickly learned how to spot ideas that were highly publishable. Instead of examining the problems as thoroughly as I could, I did the minimum amount of work necessary to create the data for a paper. In academia, we call these LPUs (Least Publishable Unit). I became very good at creating a LPUs around novel and publishable ideas.  This isn't good. I would have served myself better by finding big problems and tackling them as thoroughly as I could.  Second, by attaining the goal, you may actually fall short of your potential.  Partway through my PhD, I transferred from the University of Colorado to Northwestern University. My expectation was that I'd graduate in 3 more years at Northwestern. I left Colorado with one top-tier paper under my belt, and hit Northwestern in full stride. In the first year there, I got two more top-tier papers.  Yes, that means I reached the goal!  So what did I proceed to do? I got comfortable. The next year, I published one paper, and the final year, I got a short paper into a top conference. I count all of those as 4.5 top-tier papers.  I blew past the goal of 3-4 top-tier papers, but when I look back on it now, it doesn't feel good. I know I could have done way better than that if I continued to push.  My goals and their unintended outcomes.  I'm not ashamed of my grad school days. I am pretty proud of the progress, and still like some of the work I did. But I know I was capable of more, and I hate knowing that.  You remember the first goal of making the California state meet? The one where I failed?  The funny thing is that I regret not making the state meet, but I don't regret anything else about it. I certainly don't feel bad about the failure. I know that I trained as hard as I could, and I feel confident that I didn't leave much at the table.  In short, my failure was a success, and my success was a failure.  I've learned my lesson.  These days, I don't focus much on goals anymore.  I focus on execution. I focus on learning. I focus on my craft. I focus on being good. And then being better than that. And then better.. and better..  When I work this way, I'm always proud of myself. I don't say it in a trite "feel-good" sort of way. I feel genuinely proud because I am trying as hard as I can.  What else can you ask for?  Occasionally, I'll hit a milepost (which could be considered a goal). I acknowledge it, and then pat myself on the back to celebrate the progress. But then I keep moving forward because moving forward is the right thing to focus on.  –  P.S. This is post number #21 in a 100 day blogging challenge. See you tomorrow!  Follow me on Twitter @alexshye.  Check out my current project Soulmix, your daily mix of food for the soul. Request an invite now for free access to the public beta!
Abstract  Context: The American Heart Association Nutrition Committee recommends women and men consume no more than 100 and 150 kcal of added sugar per day, respectively, whereas the Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2010, suggests a maximal added sugar intake of 25% or less of total energy. Objective: To address this discrepancy, we compared the effects of consuming glucose, fructose, or high-fructose corn syrup (HFCS) at 25% of energy requirements (E) on risk factors for cardiovascular disease. Participants, Design and Setting, and Intervention: Forty-eight adults (aged 18–40 yr; body mass index 18–35 kg/m2) resided at the Clinical Research Center for 3.5 d of baseline testing while consuming energy-balanced diets containing 55% E complex carbohydrate. For 12 outpatient days, they consumed usual ad libitum diets along with three servings per day of glucose, fructose, or HFCS-sweetened beverages (n = 16/group), which provided 25% E requirements. Subjects then consumed energy-balanced diets containing 25% E sugar-sweetened beverages/30% E complex carbohydrate during 3.5 d of inpatient intervention testing. Main Outcome Measures: Twenty-four-hour triglyceride area under the curve, fasting plasma low-density lipoprotein (LDL), and apolipoprotein B (apoB) concentrations were measured. Results: Twenty-four-hour triglyceride area under the curve was increased compared with baseline during consumption of fructose (+4.7 ± 1.2 mmol/liter × 24 h, P = 0.0032) and HFCS (+1.8 ± 1.4 mmol/liter × 24 h, P = 0.035) but not glucose (−1.9 ± 0.9 mmol/liter × 24 h, P = 0.14). Fasting LDL and apoB concentrations were increased during consumption of fructose (LDL: +0.29 ± 0.082 mmol/liter, P = 0.0023; apoB: +0.093 ± 0.022 g/liter, P = 0.0005) and HFCS (LDL: +0.42 ± 0.11 mmol/liter, P < 0.0001; apoB: +0.12 ± 0.031 g/liter, P < 0.0001) but not glucose (LDL: +0.012 ± 0.071 mmol/liter, P = 0.86; apoB: +0.0097 ± 0.019 g/liter, P = 0.90). Conclusions: Consumption of HFCS-sweetened beverages for 2 wk at 25% E increased risk factors for cardiovascular disease comparably with fructose and more than glucose in young adults.  In epidemiological studies, consumption of sugar and/or sugar-sweetened beverages has been linked to the presence of unfavorable lipid levels (1–5), insulin resistance (6, 7), fatty liver (8, 9), type 2 diabetes (10–12), cardiovascular disease (13), and metabolic syndrome (14). We have recently reported that consumption of fructose-sweetened beverages at 25% of energy requirements (E) increased visceral adipose deposition and de novo lipogenesis, produced dyslipidemia, and decreased glucose tolerance/insulin sensitivity in older, overweight/obese men and women, whereas consumption of glucose-sweetened beverages did not (15). Because the commonly consumed sugars, sucrose and high-fructose corn syrup (HFCS), are composed of 50–55% fructose, these results provide a potential mechanistic explanation for the associations between sugar consumption and metabolic disease. However, the adverse metabolic effects of fructose consumption observed in the older, overweight/obese population (15) may not occur in a younger, leaner population.  Authors of three recent reviews have concluded that long-term sugar intakes as high as 25–50% E have no adverse effects with respect to components of metabolic syndrome (16) and that fructose consumption up to 140 g/d does not result in biologically relevant increases of fasting or postprandial triglycerides (TG) in healthy, normal-weight (17), or overweight or obese (18) humans. These reviews (16, 17) are cited in the Report of the Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee on the Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2010, released June of 2010, in which a maximal intake level of 25% or less of total energy from added sugars is suggested (19). However, in August of 2009, the American Heart Association Nutrition Committee recommended that women consume no more than 100 kcal/d and men consume no more than 150 kcal/d of added sugar (20). This equates to differences between the two guidelines of 400 kcal/d for women consuming 2000 kcal/d and 525 kcal/d for men consuming 2500 kcal/d. To address this discrepancy, we compared the effects of consuming 25%E as glucose, fructose or HFCS for 2 weeks
Revelations about the National Security Agency (NSA) keep on coming, this time in the form of information about its elite hacking unit called Tailored Access Operations (TAO), which helps the agency target specific people and computer networks around the world and has the ability to install "backdoors" in computers and other devices in order to gain access to those networks.  The report, based on leaked documents from former NSA contractor Edward Snowden, was published on Sunday in the German magazine Der Spiegel.  The report shows that American spies intercept computer deliveries, exploit hardware vulnerabilities and even hijack Microsoft's internal error-reporting system to spy on their targets.  Citing internal NSA documents, the magazine said Sunday that TAO's mission was "getting the ungettable," and quoted an unnamed intelligence official as saying that TAO had gathered "some of the most significant intelligence our country has ever seen."  Der Spiegel said TAO had a catalog of high-tech gadgets for particularly hard-to-crack cases, including computer monitor cables specially modified to record what is being typed across the screen, USB sticks secretly fitted with radio transmitters to broadcast stolen data over the airwaves and fake cell phone base stations intended to intercept mobile phone signals on the go.  The unit, which is based out of San Antonio is able exploit weaknesses in the architecture of the Internet to deliver malicious software to specific computers, according to the report. Some agents at TAO are tasked with taking advantage of weaknesses in hardware or software distributed by some of the world's leading information technology companies, including Cisco Systems, Inc. and China's Huawei Technologies Ltd., the magazine reported.  Der Spiegel cited a 2008 mail order catalog-style list of vulnerabilities that NSA spies could exploit from companies such as Irvine, Calif.,-based Western Digital Corp. or Round Rock, Texas-based Dell Inc.  This appears to be the first revelation about the NSA that also details their exploits beyond the virtual world.  Der Spiegel said that if the NSA tracked a target ordering a new computer or other electronic accessories, TAO could tap its allies in the FBI and the CIA, intercept the hardware in transit and take it to a secret workshop where it could be discreetly fitted with espionage software or hardware before being sent on its way.  Intercepting computer equipment in such a way is among the NSA's "most productive operations" and has helped harvest intelligence from around the world, one document cited by Der Spiegel stated.  The targets of the sophisticated hacks ranged from suspected terrorists to world leaders. The NSA was able to read the Blackberry messages and emails of leaders around the world, according to the report.  According to Der Spiegel, the documents also show that the NSA would spy by exploiting Microsoft's crash reports, familiar to many users of the Windows operating system (the little dialogue box that pops up when a program freezes). The reporting system is intended to help Microsoft engineers improve their products and fix bugs, but Der Spiegel said the NSA was also sifting through the reports to help spies break into machines running Windows. One NSA document cited by the magazine appeared to poke fun at Microsoft's expense, replacing the software giant's standard error report message with the words: "This information may be intercepted by a foreign sigint (signals intelligence) system to gather detailed information and better exploit your machine."  Microsoft did not immediately return a call from The Associated Press seeking comment, but the company is one of several U.S. firms that have demanded more transparency from the NSA — and worked to bolster their security — in the wake of Snowden's revelations, whose disclosures have ignited an international debate over privacy and surveillance.  The Der Spiegel report caps off a week of attention around the NSA leaks. On Friday, journalist and Snowden supporter Glenn Greenwald chastised media for not being more critical of the government.  Also last week, a judge ruled the NSA's phone data collection program constitutional, and Snowden gave a lengthy interview to the Washington Post.  Al Jazeera and wire services
NBA owners approved uniform advertising beginning in the 17-18 season on Thursday evening.  Ads will be placed on the upper left portion of the jerseys. The sponsored version of the jerseys will not be available for retail.  The NBA first had ads on jerseys during this year's All-Star Game.  The initial proposal to owners was for teams to keep 50 percent of the sponsorship money from the jersey ads and for 50 percent to be added to the revenue-sharing pool for all teams.
Are women oppressed today? If so, why is it that they live more? Why are they happier?  Long-time political activist Adam Leonas examines the arguments about the oppression of women, and shows that all the supposed disadvantages are essentially trade-offs against much worse alternatives.  He takes a fascinating look into the biology of the sexes, to find where female superiority and male weakness is located: sex. He argues that the point in history when the prehistoric gender balance was overturned was during "the worst mistake in human history": the Agricultural Revolution, when what he calls "the Female Coup d'etat" took place.  The author, being unrelentingly radically progressive, concludes that in historic societies, capitalism included, women's power is greater due to their control over sex. He proposes radical ways for men to deal with their disadvantaged position, as well as radical ways to remedy the gender balance in society as a necessary prerequisite for equality and social peace.  Read excerpts from the book.  The Table of Contents.  Review by National Coalition for Men PR Director J. Steven Svoboda.  What readers say about the book.  Video review.  Advertisements
This week, the management group overseeing Germany's Nürburgring Nordschleife moved to ban manufacturers from attempting and publishing timed laps on the famed, 13-mile course. For car enthusiasts who judge modern sports cars by how quickly they can round the circuit, it's an unthinkable, if not wholly unexpected, turn of events.  For Christian Von Koenigsegg, it's even more disappointing; the news comes just days before he was to spend a week at the circuit with the new Koenigsegg One:1 hypercar in hopes of setting a lap record. It's part of Koenigsegg's three-year plan to establish the One:1 as the fastest production car in the world.  It was early Tuesday morning when I received an urgent phone call from Christian. In two days, I was to jump on a plane with my team to capture the Koenigsegg lap-time effort for our upcoming 4K documentary, APEX, which we're producing in conjunction with Sony. This is the final chapter in a storyline that follows the past three years of auto manufacturers battling it out for technological dominance in producing halo cars for the next decade, cars including the Porsche 918, McLaren P1, and Ferrari LaFerrari. All have shown what they're worth on the track, but the Koenigsegg One:1 has yet to do so.  Now we have a new story to tell: The Nürburgring benchmark of sports-car superiority has come to a screeching halt, and the Koenigsegg One:1's place on the leaderboard is in jeopardy. We'd been on stand-by to fly across the Atlantic (on moments' notice) to capture Koenigsegg's attempt. This time, helicopter crews were ready to go, logistics were sorted, and travel was booked. The sudden notification from Nürburgring management couldn't have come at a more inopportune moment for everyone.  The decision to ban timed laps stems from an accident earlier this year at a VLN race, involving driver Jann Mardenborough, in which a spectator was killed. Track management reacted by imposing a speed limit at Flugplatz, where the crash occurred. Since then, management has imposed further restrictions in other high-speed sectors. This is a particularly disappointing development for Koenigsegg, since the One:1's flat-out speed in those sectors would likely have given it a lap-time advantage. In Tiergarten, for instance, a long, fast section where Christian estimates the One:1 could easily hit 300 kph, speed is now restricted to just 200 kph.  Official word from Nurburgring management is that these restrictions will be reviewed at the end of the year, but for the time being, manufacturers like Koenigsegg are banned from attempting lap-time runs — even if they've rented out the entire track for themselves. The Koenigsegg team and the One:1 are now stuck in a holding pattern. They have a car that's ready to attack the northern loop. Their simulations and data suggest they've got a good chance to best their competitors. Even Koenigsegg's past track data suggests their best segment times, when stitched together, would undercut the Porsche 918's official 6:57 time by double-digit seconds.  But there's a twist to the story. After the initial restrictions were in place, Lamborghini ran its new Aventador SV and published a sub-seven-minute lap time. Nürburgring management claims Lamborghini's attempt happened one day before they issued the latest round of restrictions. Yet at the same time, WTCC laps have been allowed to ignore all speed limits all together? What's the deal? We're investigating.  So what's next for Koenigsegg and our film, APEX? The helicopter crews are ready, the One:1 is ready, but we don't have anywhere to run the car.  Is there a new benchmark to be set? Should nearby Spa Francorchamps, another long, high-speed track with motorsports provenance, become the new venue for lap time tests? Maybe a stateside circuit like the four-mile West Grand course at VIR would fit the bill? What about setting an endurance record? Let the Reddit car forums march with their keyboards and pitchforks.  Author: J.F. Musial  www.apex-the-movie.com  Special Thanks to Robb Holland and Mike Spinelli for details and help writing this article.
The agreement reached at the COP21 Paris climate change talks is certainly a great improvement on anything that has gone before (One paragraph at a time: how the deal was done to save the planet, 14 December). Whether it is enough to save the planet (to be more precise, save the human race from catastrophe; the planet will look after itself) is questionable. Apart from the question of actual implementation of even the agreed measures (themselves expected to achieve only a 2.7C limit) there are many factors not taken into account. Barack Obama says the deal will create "more jobs and economic growth". But growth, even "green growth", is precisely the problem. We live on a finite planet with finite resources which we are already exploiting to the limit and beyond. The aim must be to achieve a steady-state economy, with resources fairly shared, but that is incompatible with capitalism's growth imperative.  A glaring omission is the effect of the many armed conflicts currently ongoing, The money allocated to tackling climate change is still dwarfed by that devoted to the means of death and destruction, currently $1.75tn annually. These conflicts themselves contribute to climate change: the US military is the biggest single corporate user of fossil fuels, a large proportion by high-flying jets, where the warming effect is variously estimated as from 1.7 to 4.0 times that at ground level. They inhibit attempts to deal with people's real problems, the effects of global warming among many others. Mass migration, from a variety of causes including conflict and climate change, is another major problem that is ignored in the Paris agreement. There is still a very long way to go to ensure the future of the human race.  Frank Jackson  Former co-chair, World Disarmament Campaign  • The Paris accord has been hailed as a diplomatic triumph because the alternative is too awful to contemplate. Nevertheless the atmosphere does not respond to political craft and strategic compromise, it only responds to the laws of physics which are uncompromising and potentially lethal for most species on Earth, including our own.  All of the really tough decisions – such as carbon taxes, country-specific limits and financial penalties – have been shelved, which will allow countries such as India, China and even the UK to carry on burning fossil fuels while paying lip-service to the need to reduce emissions. Instead the goal of 1.5C and even 2C will now rely on unproven and currently non-existent technologies such as nuclear fusion, carbon capture with storage or carbon negative technologies. I pray these will come in time but how many people would get on a flight in the hope that someone can defuse the bomb before it blows up?  Dr Robin Russell-Jones  Stoke Poges, Buckinghamshire  • While the agreement on tackling climate change is welcome, the big test, and the most challenging, will be the implementation. There are substantial business opportunities here, with countries supporting research and development into alternative energy and energy saving being the winners.  In order to develop this commercial opportunity and contribute to global emission reduction the UK government needs to reverse some of the decisions taken since it came to power. These include: divesting from renewables: privatising the Green Investment Bank; performing a monumental U-turn on the UK's £1bn carbon capture and storage (CCS) competition; reducing subsidies for improving energy efficiency; reducing the requirement for developers to build energy-efficient homes; making fracking easy to achieve and windfarms difficult; and continuing to subsidise fossil fuels.  The UK could be taking a lead, and developing a substantial commercial advantage, instead of backtracking on everything the coalition achieved.  David Becket  Newcastle-under-Lyme, Staffordshire  • The Paris climate talks followed a pattern that is familiar in international environmental negotiations. At the start of the conference tough commitments and ambitious targets were proposed, including on forest conservation and the transfer of environmentally clean technology to developing countries. Over the next two weeks many of these were weakened with caveats and, in some cases, quietly abandoned as delegates edged towards a politically acceptable compromise. This is the so-called convoy principle: everyone stays together, but all move at the speed of the slowest. Most disappointing of all is the failure to agree legally binding greenhouse gas emission reduction commitments. Without this, the pledge to limit the global temperature rise to less than 1.5C above pre-industrial levels remains purely aspirational.  David Humphreys  Reader in environmental policy, Open University  • The key phrase in Bill McKibben's piece (Climate deal: the pistol has fired, so why aren't we running?, 14 December) is "You have to raise the price of carbon steeply and quickly", or else the necessary switch to renewable energy will not happen.  In other words, people have to vote for much higher petrol prices, much higher gas and electricity bills and far more expensive air travel. Or, which would be equally unpopular, we could ration
From the NY Times, excerpt "Falser Words Were Never Spoken."   …Gandhi's words have been tweaked a little too much in recent years. Perhaps you've noticed a bumper sticker that purports to quote him: "Be the change you wish to see in the world." When you first come across it, this does sound like something Gandhi would have said. But when you think about it a little, it starts to sound more like … a bumper sticker. Displayed brightly on the back of a Prius, it suggests that your responsibilities begin and end with your own behavior. It's apolitical, and a little smug.  Sure enough, it turns out there is no reliable documentary evidence for the quotation. The closest verifiable remark we have from Gandhi is this:  "If we could change ourselves, the tendencies in the world would also change. As a man changes his own nature, so does the attitude of the world change towards him. … We need not wait to see what others do."  Here, Gandhi is telling us that personal and social transformation go hand in hand, but there is no suggestion in his words that personal transformation is enough. In fact, for Gandhi, the struggle to bring about a better world involved not only stringent self-denial and rigorous adherence to the philosophy of nonviolence; it also involved a steady awareness that one person, alone, can't change anything, an awareness that unjust authority can be overturned only by great numbers of people working together with discipline and persistence.  When you start to become aware of these bogus quotations, you can't stop finding them…"  ~  Bonus: Gandhi: how to be an effective Activist.
Yesterday, Nintendo teased three classic games for release on the Wii U eShop this week. Those titles have since been revealed.  Listings on the ESRB indicate that Kirby Squeak Squad, Kirby's Return to Dream Land, and Kirby 64: The Crystal Shards are coming to the North American Wii U eShop. Each one should be available starting tomorrow.  Source, Via  Share this: Twitter  Facebook  Reddit  Tumblr  Google  More  Email  Print   LinkedIn  Pinterest   Pocket
Inspired, perhaps, by the great Rancho Bravo piano installation of 2011, a new campaign has placed two pianos on surprising Capitol Hill stages. Thanks to Pianos in the Parks, you'll find "artistically enhanced" uprights ready for the playing inside Cal Anderson and Volunteer Park:  Pianos in the Parks features 20 artistically enhanced pianos created by Gage Academy of Art faculty, students and friends, each placed in one of 15 iconic Seattle city parks and open spaces, such as Alki Park, Cal Anderson Park, and Seattle Center, and five King County Parks locations, including Marymoor Park and the Sammamish River Trail.  The project is designed to encourage "Puget Sound residents to discover 32,000+ acres of City of Seattle and King County parks and open spaces through the power of music and art," a statement on the month-long effort reads.  It also comes as Seattle prepares to vote on a Seattle tax district to pay for the city's parks and community centers. The project is underwritten by Laird Norton Wealth Management, according to a statement on the campaign.  While the painted pianos are intended to look nice, they're also — at least for now — in tune:  Each piano, procured and tuned by Classic Pianos, is available for the public to play. Musicians of every level are encouraged to enter the Pianos in the Parks Facebook contest at: https://www.facebook.com/pianosintheparks, in which they can upload a video of their performance of an original piece or music from the public domain for a chance to play at Concerts at the Mural presented by KEXP and Seattle Center on Friday, August 22. Entries will be voted on by Facebook "likes" with the top five most heavily "liked" videos being judged by a community panel.  Capitol Hill's Gage Academy lead the way in decorating the pianos. How Seattle Parks intends to keep people from, um, adding additional works of art to the pianos is not entirely clear. The pianos will offered for auction at the end of the project. Proceeds from the sales will benefit Seattle Parks and Recreation, King County Parks, Seattle Symphony, KEXP and Gage. You can learn more — and make a bid — at pianosintheparks.com.
NEWARK — Construction on an extension of PATH service to Newark Liberty International Airport is scheduled to begin in late 2018 and be completed five years later, according to documents from the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.  A request for proposals, or RFP, to manage the $1.5 billion project issued on Sept. 26 calls for construction to begin in the first quarter of 2018, with completion scheduled for the fourth quarter of 2023. The management contract for the project is to be awarded by the end of this year, according to the the RFP, which notes that the dates are subject to change.  Proponents of the project say it would provide a one-seat mass transit link between the airport and the heart of the metropolitan area it serves, an amenity that has come to be expected by frequent fliers.  Planners and transit advocates say a PATH airport extension would also provide a convenient and affordable commuting option for airport workers in Hudson and Essex counties as well as New York. Environmentalists have embraced the project as a means of reducing automobile traffic.  Support dates back at least to the late 1970's, when an advisory panel recommended the link. The Port Authority commissioned a study that recommended the project in 2012, and it was included in the agency's current $27.6 billion 10-year capital plan adopted in February, though without a specific time frame.  A Port Authority spokesman, Steve Coleman, confirmed that Friday's RFP was the first document to lay out a schedule for the project, but cautioned that the dates were not set in stone. Proponents nonetheless welcomed word that construction was now at least tentatively scheduled to begin.   "21st Century transportation is vital if we're going to compete with major airports around the country and the globe," said Joe Sitt, chaiman of the Global Gateway Alliance, an airport advocacy group. "So we're glad to see the Port Authority putting concrete milestones on the table toward making a one-seat ride from the World Trade Center PATH to Newark Airport a reality."  The extension is to run from the PATH's western terminus at Newark Penn Station, along an existing Northeast Corridor right of way used by Amtrak and New Jersey Transit trains. NJ Transit already provides heavy rail service between Newark Penn and Newark Liberty via a station on the Northeast Corridor linked to the air terminals and other areas by the airport monorail.  The PATH extension would be largely redundant, following the same route and using the same monorail link. But riders could continue on PATH trains from Newark Penn on to Harrison, Jersey City stops at Journal Square, Grove Street and Exchange Place and at the World Trade Center in Manhattan. With a single transfer, PATH riders from Hoboken or Manhattan's West Side could also reach the airport, albeit in a two-seat ride.  Steve Strunsky may be reached at sstrunsky@njadvancemedia.com. Follow hin on Twitter @SteveStrunsky. Find NJ.com on Facebook.
Verizon today finally followed its wireless rivals in offering clear discounts on service when you pay for your own phone. That extends an offer which previously only applied to customers who were buying the phone on an installment plan from the company. While Verizon has come late to the party, it's certainly now on board and that offers existing and prospective customers a chance to save money. As always, though, there are some confusing details to sort through. To help you determine whether Verizon's latest deal makes sense for you or not, we'll break it down here.  Bring your own phone, get a discount?  T-Mobile upended the industry last year with its "Un-carrier" approach, which included an end to contract plans. But it also put an end to discounted, subsidized phones along with them. At least sort of. By breaking the phone cost out separately and billing you for it over 24 months, the carrier made it clear that you were always paying the full price of your $199 iPhone, even if it didn't seem that way when you plunked down two Benjamins to get it in the first place. The key was that in exchange for explicitly making installment payments on the phone, T-Mobile lowered the price of your monthly bill. And once the phone was paid off, if you chose to keep it, you could enjoy a lower price going forward.  When AT&T and Verizon first attempted to match T-Mobile's offering, they almost comically began offering monthly installment pricing on phones while leaving out the monthly discounts. This made the first response easy to ignore. AT&T fixed its offering in December and yesterday Verizon joined the party as well. (Verizon's new offer begins Thursday and neither company is promising these will last forever, but it's easy to imagine them becoming permanent).  To get the lower monthly bill, you're going to have to either pay the full price for a phone, which can range up to $750 for a 32GB iPhone, or buy it over time. The installment plans are called AT&T Next and Verizon Edge. (Update: With Verizon, you have to buy the phone over time to get the discount. If you pay in full for a phone, the company isn't doing anything for you, even though they ought to.) Typically, they allow you to spread that big expense over 2 years without adding any interest cost. That $750 iPhone, for example will run you $31.24 a month on Verizon, for $749 and change -- almost exactly the same amount as buying it outright. There's almost no downside to taking Verizon's low-cost financing. In fact, if you want to upgrade early, once you've paid off half the phone you can trade it in and start the process over again with a brand new model. The only way to do that on contract is to sell your phone independently and buy a replacement at full price; that's much less convenient even when the net cost is comparable.  What do the savings look like?  The question then, is what do you get in return for taking one of these plans? The answer will depend on how much data you purchase every month. Both AT&T and Verizon reserve the best discounts for customers with 10GB or more of monthly data, which costs $100 from each carrier. On top of that, you'll pay an "access fee" for each smartphone that shares the data. Normally, that's $40 a month per phone. So a typical family of four with a plan like this will pay $260 a month plus taxes. (Note that most families of four don't actually use that much data and could get by with a smaller plan.)  But if you don't take $199 iPhones, or the shiny new Galaxy S5 from Samsung, and instead bring your own phone from another carrier -- assuming it's compatible, which either carrier can help you determine -- or buy it with Verizon Edge, the company will knock off $25 from that $40 fee, bringing it down to $15. AT&T will do the same. So now, if all four of you are doing that, the $260 can be brought down to $160. This is pricing in the ballpark of what the next tier of carriers offers, although T-Mobile has recently done things like bringing back unlimited data of sort, which can make their pricing more attractive still. Now, of course, if everyone is paying $31 and change for an iPhone or Galaxy, the monthly bill will not be $160 but rather $285. But consider that instead of shelling out $800 initially on phones as well as $260 per month, you now start out paying nothing and only increase monthly payments by $25.  The customer wins, at last?  This deal starts to look pretty good, but there are caveats. First, if you are buying less than 10GB per month, the per-line discount is only $10, not $25. Our sample family would see its monthly bill
Flights in and out of Cork Airport were delayed this morning after the airport was forced to close due to a drone flying in the area.  Flights in and out of Cork Airport were delayed this morning after the airport was forced to close due to a drone flying in the area.  Cork Airport forced to close temporarily due to drone flying in the area  Gardaí are currently on site and are dealing with the matter.  A spokeswoman for the airport said that service has since resumed but aircrafts are approaching "with caution".  "There was a drone spotted in the airport and we had two aircraft on hold but now pilots have been told to come back in, obviously with caution".  UPDATE Cork airport reopen after temporarily closure due to 2 drones were spotted close by https://t.co/F8rmU9rcCR pic.twitter.com/brFybCwfxU — AIRLIVE (@airlivenet) April 20, 2017  The airplanes were forced to circle the airport and were unable to land during the incident after the drone was spotted at 9.45am this morning.  "Gardaí remain on the scene as they try to find the culprit," the spokeswoman said.  Cork Airport was the first Irish airport to launch a 'no drone zone' as part of a crackdown on rogue drone operators last year.  It is illegal to operate a drone within 5km of any aerodrome or within civil or military controlled airspace.  Online Editors
Legal Forms and Online Documents, Law Books, & Software  Thousands of do-it-yourself products including legal forms, online documents, books and ebooks, and software. Generate a customized estate planning form like a will, a living trust, or a power of attorney, in just minutes. Download a lease form easily, complete with state-specific instructions and information. Or create an LLC, and get all the most common business forms you'll need to operate your business. All of our products are written in plain-English, and designed to be consumer friendly.  Our forms help many people create useful legal documents. However, general information is never a substitute for personalized advice from a knowledgeable lawyer. If you want professional advice about the best way to craft or use legal documents in your particular circumstances, consult an attorney licensed to practice in your state.  Use of our forms is subject to our Terms of Use, Supplemental Terms, and Privacy Policy.
National Football League The NFL will ban the use of non-standard facemasks, such as those pictured above in a league illustration.  We've likely reached the end of the Bane-like facemasks in the NFL.  NFL Media Insider Ian Rapoport obtained a league memo from NFL executive vice president of football operations Troy Vincent that states the NFL will prohibit the use of non-standard/overbuilt facemasks for the 2014 season.  Wild facemasks of the NFL SEE PHOTOS Take a look at the non-traditional facemasks that have been worn throughout the years.  According to the memo, research from the National Operating Committee on Standards for Athletic Equipment showed that the non-standard facemasks more frequently fail safety and certification tests and aren't up to NFL safety standards.  Among the characteristics of the banned facemasks are "more bars, smaller spaces between the bars, and a generally larger coverage area," Vincent wrote in the memo.  A study conducted by the University of New Hampshire for the NFL states that the added weight of the masks negatively affects the structure of the helmet, can cause neck fatigue that could lead to a more head-down posture during contact and can provide a false sense of security during tackling.  Four players wore what would now be considered illegal facemasks in 2013, Rapoport reported. Players with medical approval for facemasks in 2013 must be re-evaluated prior to the 2014 season, and strict guidelines for future medical exemptions in regards to facemasks will be enforced, the memo stated.  While we enjoyed the diversity of the inventive facemasks, player safety is paramount when it comes to the head and neck.  The latest "Around The League Podcast" ranks the league's top tight ends and debates Andrew Luck vs. Cam Newton.
Here are the inactives for the Denver Broncos and the New England Patriots for this afternoons game at Gillette Stadium in Foxboro Massachusetts.  Denver Broncos:  Thoughts: The Broncos will be out tight end Virgil Green, safety Quinton Carter and linebacker Steven Johnson. The absence of Green could be a big loss for the Broncos run defense. The weather is looking awful in Foxboro, and Green is the Broncos best run blocking tight end. Carter will also be missed as the Broncos will try to cover Patriots tight end Rob Gronkowski.  Cornerback Omar Bolden is active after missing last Thursday game with a concussion, also rookie receiver Cody Latimer and reserve defensive tackle Mitch Unrein will be active.  New England Patriots:
Premium users get access to additional features designed to maximize gold-making efficiency with TradeSkillMaster.  Our current list of premium benefits is below, with a link to sign-up at the bottom of the page!  Go Premium Now!
The real action is in the competition for second place in the Republican field, where CNN and RCP both have Rubio's support at 15 percent; all of the CNN polling and most of the RCP polling, though, was conducted before Rubio's already-infamous performance in Saturday night's debate. John Kasich, who seemed to do well in the debate and has picked up a number of New Hampshire endorsements, is in third in the FiveThirtyEight projections and in fourth, narrowly behind Ted Cruz's 13 percent, in both the CNN and RCP numbers.
long: The long data type is a 64-bit two's complement integer. The signed long has a minimum value of -263 and a maximum value of 263-1. In Java SE 8 and later, you can use the long data type to represent an unsigned 64-bit long, which has a minimum value of 0 and a maximum value of 264-1.
A professor at Yale University talks about what history can teach us.  "We have at most a year to defend the Republic, perhaps less. What happens in the next few weeks is very important."  This article was first posted by Süddeutsche Zeitung.  Timothy Snyder is a professor of history at Yale University and the author of numerous books of European history, including Bloodlands and Black Earth. His most recent book, On Tyranny: Twenty Lessons from the Twentieth Century, will be published at the end of the month. This is the English version of an interview published in Süddeutsche Zeitung on February 7, with some additional information due to current developments.  Donald Trump has been president for three weeks. How would you describe his start?  The first thing that we have to notice is that the institutions have not thus far restrained him. He never took them seriously, acts as if they don't exist, and clearly wishes they didn't. The story that Americans have told themselves from the moment he declared his candidacy for president, was that one institution or another would defeat him or at least change his behavior—he won't get the nomination; if he gets the nomination, he will be a normal Republican; he will get defeated in the general election; if he wins the presidency will mature him (that was what Obama said). I never thought any of that was true. He doesn't seem to care about the institutions and the laws except insofar as they appear as barriers to the goal of permanent kleptocratic authoritarianism and immediate personal gratification. It is all about him all of time, it is not about the citizens and our political traditions.  You wrote an article for Slate in November, comparing the rise of Donald Trump with the rise of Adolf Hitler. Why did you feel the need to publish such a piece?  It's very important that we use history to our advantage now, rather than finding in history taboos and ways to silence one another. The history of the 1930s is terribly important to Americans (and Europeans) right now, just as it is slipping from our memories. I was not trying to provoke one more fruitless series of conversations about comparability. I was trying to help Americans who were generally either shocked (people who voted against Trump) or surprised (people who voted for him, who generally thought he would lose) find their bearings in a new situation. The temptation in a new situation is to imagine that nothing has changed. That is a choice that has political consequences: self-delusion leads to half-conscious anticipatory obedience and then to regime change. Anyway, I didn't actually compare Trump to Hitler, I didn't use these two names. What I did was to write a very short history of the rise of Adolf Hitler to power without using his name, which might allow Americans to recognize certain similarities to the moment they themselves were living through. I know that these comparisons are a national taboo in Germany, but at the moment its rather important that Germans be generous with their history and help others to learn how republics collapse. Most Americans are exceptionalists, we think we live outside of history. Americans tend to think: "We have freedom because we love freedom, we love freedom because we are free." It is a bit circular and doesn't acknowledge the historical structures that can favor or weaken democratic republics. We don't realize how similar our predicaments are to those of other people.  You use the Weimar Republic as a warning example.  I wanted to remind my fellow Americans that intelligent people, not so different from ourselves, have experienced the collapse of a republic before. It is one example among many. Republics, like other forms of government, exist in history and can rise and fall. The American Founding Fathers knew this, which is why there were obsessed with the history of classical republics and their decline into oligarchy and empire. We seem to have lost that tradition of learning from others, and we need it back. A quarter century ago, after the collapse of communism, we declared that history was over—and in an amazing way we forgot everything we once knew about communism, fascism and National Socialism. In this little article for Slate, I was trying to remind us about things that we once knew.  How similar is the situation between Germany of the 1930s and today's United States?  Of course, not everything is similar. Some things are better now than they were in the 1930s but some things are worse. The media is worse, I would say. It is very polarized and it is very concentrated. In Germany before the state shut down German newspapers, there was authentic variety that we don't have now. People in the 1930s generally had longer attention spans than we do. On the other side, the United States is a larger country, with pockets of wealth distributed widely, and it is more connected to the world. The main advantage that we have is that we can learn from the 1930s. Again,
As Dan Lydiate prepares to return to Welsh rugby after spending just 17 months in France, we look at a selection of his best moments during Wales' Grand Slam-winning Six Nations season in 2012.  The flanker, who won man-of-the-match awards in wins over Scotland and France, was named Six Nations 2012 player of the tournament after securing 25% of the votes.  Racing Metro has confirmed he will move back to Wales following the 2014 autumn internationals, but it is not yet known which of the four Welsh regions the 37-times capped flanker will join on his return.  Available to UK users only.
"Myopia" is a condition in which visual images come to a focus in front of the retina of the eye, resulting in the inability to see distant objects clearly. Those with myopia can be referred to as "myopic" (or, less formally, "nearsighted"). "Myopic" has extended meanings, too.
English [ edit ]  Etymology [ edit ]  Borrowed from Ancient Greek πολιορκητικα (poliorkētika, "things related to sieges"), neuter plural of πολιορκητικος (poliorkētikos). Compare poliorcetic.  Noun [ edit ]  poliorcetics  The art of siege warfare, namely, that of conducting or resisting a siege.  Translations [ edit ]
So what's new in my life? 09/11/18 - Just got back from vacation.  I just got back from a much needed and really great nine day vacation to my remote Arizona property. It was a really restful and relaxing visit. I got a lot accomplished while I was there, but still found time to just goof off and have fun too. I got to do some astronomy, even though the weather was pretty cloudy most of the time. Here is a 50 minute exposure of M101. It turned out pretty good. Click the photo to more photos and read about all my adventures from this vacation on my Travel and Vacation Photos page.  08/19/18 - Beach Re-Nourishment at Indian Rocks Beach, Florida.  My girlfriend and I like to take long walks on the beach in the evenings after dinner. We try to get out there at least a couple of times a week, and we walk at least four miles each time. A four mile walk in the sand is quite a workout. Plus the beach at night is cooler, less crowded, and more romantic;-) Anyway, we could see the beach renourishment happening off in the distance at the far northern end of our walks. Last night we decided to get a closer look. We parked two miles further north than usual and started our walk from there. It was still 1.3 miles before we reached the area where they are currently working.   There is some sort of large barge about a mile offshore pumping sand slurry through a pipe about four feet in diameter onto the beach. A big machine separates out any debris, and just let's clean sand and water flow onto the beach. Two huge bulldozers were spreading the sand around. They were about doubling the width of the beach to provide for protection from storms. We continued walking for another 0.7 miles beyond the work zone before turning around and heading back to the truck. The new wider beach on the far side was really nice. Since we are both into paleontology, we wished we could have got a look into the dumpster all the debris separated from the sand was being dumped into. We could hear stuff banging its way down the length of the pipe. There were probably a lot of nice shells and maybe some big shark teeth and fossils in there. No dice though. A guy was patrolling the parameter of the work zone and shooing everyone away. Gotta find out where they dump that stuff.  08/14/18 - Facing off a plaster mold and lost foam casting in Aluminum.  Last weekend used my Woodpile CNC mill to face off the top of a refractory plaster mold I had cast earlier using the foam mold in the below video from 7/14/18. It was my first experiment with milling plaster. I dished out the top surface to f/4 so the resulting cast glass telescope mirror blank would have a constant glass thickness. It went well, but I am concerned about tool life. The tool seems to have been dulled a lot by the cut. The refractory plaster I use for molding glass is filled with silica and alumina to make it more heat resistant. That also tends to make it dull cutting tools quickly. I'll keep experimenting though. Maybe cutting the molds out of disks of plaster will be a better method than cutting a pattern in foam and then casting the plaster in it. Time will tell.   I also did a little lost foam casting last weekend. I needed an aluminum disk 1/2 inch thick for another project. I didn't have any flat stock on hand that I could cut it out of, so naturally I thought of firing up the foundry and casting one. It went surprisingly well, or at least seemed to at first. It always surprises me how easy lost foam casting in ordinary sand is. On the left is the kind of pattern I was using. On the right is the result. I don't know if the three soda straw vents were really needed, but they take no time to add, and they are easy to cut off the finished castings.   Here I have cut off the vents from the disk casting. I also sawed off the riser in the middle later. I then center drilled the disk and screwed it onto an arbor so I could mount it in a lathe. My plan was to take the disk in to work early on Monday and clean it up on the toolroom lathe we have there. I had also cast a large round rod of Aluminum using a bean can as a mold. I can turn it down to make any large parts I would need large diameter round stock for.   Things didn't go quite as planned. I knew the disk was a little warped (kind of like a potato chip) but didn't think it was too bad. Once it was turning in the lathe though, I could see just how bad it really was. There was no salvaging it. I tried casting another
The Motor City is going green.  In a city with too much abandoned, derelict, and ruined space, Detroiters are fighting back with one of the country's largest urban agriculture movements. Residents, nonprofits, and corporations are rehabilitating their city in a sustainable–and often edible–way.  "Detroit has really become the center of the urban agriculture movement," said Rebecca Salimen Witt.  Witt runs a nonprofit, the Greening of Detroit, dedicated to beautifying the city through tree plantings, urban gardens, and other projects.  "We estimate that there are between 1500 and 2000 gardens in the city of Detroit," she said. "Some of them are little postage stamp gardens in someone's backyard, and some of them are full scale urban farms that are growing produce for sale, serving as someone's primary living."  Even the automakers are helping: last summer, General Motors began re-purposing 250 massive shipping crates into raised-bed planters, creating the Cadillac Urban Gardens. Last week, the corporation announced they'd expand the program with another 100 steel crates. Several hefty Ford grants have also made their way into green initiatives, too.  One farmer, who would identify himself only as Magnetic Sun, said he is a 33-year-old, lifelong Detroit resident.  Tired of seeing his friends struggle to feed their families, he started gardening on a lot near his home. Now he grows corn, tomatoes, zucchini, yellow squash, kale, sunflowers, and more. Walking around his garden, he pulls an ear of corn off a plant, shucks it and takes a bite.  "I feed the elderly people on the block, the youth they come down, they help, they take food home, we sell a little bit at the market, and you know, I feed myself and my family," he said. "My aunty is 84 years old and has never seen a zucchini till last year. She's 84 years old and she's never seen the squash grow on the plant!"  This summer, Magnetic Sun took a job working with the Greening of Detroit in their gardens. ("They've taught me how to grow the biggest tomatoes I've ever seen—bigger than my fist!") Soon, he hopes to completely support himself and his family with his garden.  Putting Down Roots  It's no surprise that urban gardening has become so popular in Detroit: it's a welcome contrast.  Residential neighborhoods are still riddled with ruin. The city used to be home to 1.9 million, but is down to just 700,000 residents, leaving an estimated 30,000 acres of distressed land. So well-kept, carefully tended grounds are a welcome surprise.  It's a contrast that's at the core of Detroit's problems: with so much abandoned space, Detroit's land has lost its value, eroding the city's tax base and making it even harder for the city to maintain neighborhoods or keep empty lots from decaying further.  "Urban agriculture isn't a silver bullet for Detroit's vacant land opportunities," Witt said. "But it's certainly part…of a tapestry of vacant land uses that create for Detroiters a Detroit that is healthier, greener, the kind of place frankly that we all want to live in."  City planner Rob Anderson sees opportunity in Detroit's blight.  When Anderson became a Detroit city planner two and a half years ago, the city was trying to develop its way out of crisis. Now, they're trying to restore, renovate, and green their way out of it.  "The desirability of living in that neighborhood on that block goes way up when you transform a vacant lot or a burned out building into a space like this. I mean, this is beautiful, this is a place people want to be," he said. "People become more rooted in their place and that's what we need in this town."  In March, the city rewrote an old ordinance, legalizing urban agriculture in hopes of encouraging the green movement. Now, growing and selling produce in your backyard is allowed.  "The biggest thing we can do is try not to get in the way–within reason, of course," said Brad Dick, the head of the city's maintenance and parks department. They try to support local gardeners by dropping off mulch gathered from their tree removal duties.  A Tree Grows in Detroit  Farther east in Detroit, businessman John Hantz came up with a solution to restoring his neighborhood: trees.  Hantz proposed a $30 million plan to the city to buy up 300 acres—for $300 each—over five years, use the land to farm trees—oaks, maples, and poplars, mostly—while maintaining it. Once sold, the trees would help the company recoup the money they'd spent maintaining the land. If the community allows it,
Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Clive Davis is giving evidence at the new Hillsborough inquests  Police officers were told to put the blame for Hillsborough on "drunken, ticketless Liverpool supporters", the inquests into the disaster have heard.  Ex-inspector Clive Davis told the jury he recalled a briefing given by Ch Supt Terry Wain two days after the 15 April 1989 tragedy in Sheffield.  Mr Davis said he was told by his boss to attend the meeting as it was a good chance to get noticed "career-wise".  Two of Mr Davis' superiors dispute his account of the meeting, jurors heard.  Mr Davis said he worked as an inspector in South Yorkshire Police's research and development unit in 1989 and shared an office with his superior Ch Insp Norman Bettison.  The jury heard Mr Davis went into work on the Monday after the disaster and Ch Insp Bettison told him about the briefing due to be held later that morning.  'Discarded beer cans'  Mr Davis said Ch Insp Bettison had told him it was "the biggest thing to happen in South Yorkshire Police" and it would benefit them "to be a part of what was going to happen in the wake of it".  He told the hearing Ch Supt Wain opened the briefing, held on the fifth floor of South Yorkshire Police headquarters in Sheffield.  Mr Davis said: "His words were, and I can almost remember them verbatim, that 'we were going to put the blame for this disaster where it belongs: on the drunken, ticketless Liverpool fans'.''  Image caption Mr Davis worked in South Yorkshire Police's research and development unit at the time of the disaster  He recalled Mr Wain told the meeting officers should drive along the M62 to look for discarded beer or alcohol cans.  They were also told to speak to people living near Hillsborough and owners of local licensed premises to "look at the behaviour of Liverpool supporters", Mr Davis said.  'Early conclusion'  Mr Davis said: "This was a very high-level briefing. It was, if you like, a lead-off, a start-off... I suppose it would be like a call to arms almost."  He told the hearing Ch Supt Wain had "clearly" been "given a job to do" and his orders would only have come from the chief constable .  Mr Davis continued: "It was all still very much emerging, but to me, it seemed very early to come to such a decisive, definitive conclusion.  At the time in question, he said, the force's understanding of exactly what had happened was "embryonic".  He added: "It seemed early to me to have come to that conclusion, but this appeared to be the conclusion that people had reached."  No minutes from the meeting have been found.  Who were the 96 victims?  Image copyright other  BBC News: Profiles of all those who died  Jonathan Hough QC, who asks questions on behalf of the coroner, told the jury "no other officer" has given an account of the meeting.  Mr Davis first spoke publicly about the meeting in September 2012.  When asked why he did not raise it during the rest of his career with the force, he told the inquest: "I had no confidence, I think, that it would be properly received and properly dealt with."  He added: "My experience of South Yorkshire Police is people that raise issues and problems become the problem."  Mr Davis said it was a meeting he reflected on "almost on a daily basis".  Chris Daw QC, who represents Ch Supt Wain, said records showed his client had "nothing to do with the Hillsborough inquiry" until a week after the briefing was said to have taken place.  He suggested to Mr Davis the meeting did not happen and he was telling "barefaced lies".  Mr Davis replied: "I understand the suggestion, but I refute it."  The inquests, into the deaths of 96 Liverpool fans killed after crushing at the FA Cup semi-final tie, continues.
Preparing for an EMBA program can be a daunting task. From planning for tuition payments to laying out how you'll balance your job, your personal and family life with your new academic demands, you'll certainly have a lot of considerations on your mind.  But before you can even get to that point, you have to make it through the ultimate gatekeeper: the EMBA application process.  For EMBA program applicants, the list of required documents can seem endless. From college transcripts to GMAT scores and letters of sponsorship from your current employer, getting your application together can feel like a high-stakes scavenger hunt. To help you wade through the document maze, we've put together some key strategies for you to consider as you prioritize what are perhaps the two most important parts of your application: your essays and your letters of recommendation.  The Essay  At least one essay—and sometimes as many as three or four if you're applying to Wharton—is going to be required with your application to any top EMBA program. Fear not: constructing a clever and strategic essay could be as good as writing your own ticket into the program of your choice. If you're applying to multiple programs with several different essay prompts, here's a strategy to help you gather your thoughts and complete this task efficiently and effectively.  Before you scurry off to your laptop to grind out essay after essay, take a moment to reflect. Taking into account the past decade or more of career experience, create a list for yourself of your most significant and hard-won achievements, your most painful but educational missteps and mistakes, your finest accomplishments in times of great stress and pressure. Once you've made your list, start forming these bullet points into anecdotes or stories. Consider your narrative: if you had a moment of great career crisis, find a way to bring the story to a conclusion that shows your grit, determination and ultimate ingenuity in solving the problem. Remember that you are the star of these stories so remain highly cognizant of how you choose to portray yourself.  Once you have isolated these core stories that illustrate your career and best encapsulate the trajectory you're hoping for after you complete your EMBA, then it's time to start writing. Most EMBA programs have broad enough questions that you can easily tweak these core narratives to apply to a range of applications and essay prompts. For example, The University of Chicago Booth School of Business asks only why you're applying to their school and what unique experiences you hope to contribute to the program. A similar question you could use the same core narrative to reply to comes from the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University: "What do you consider to be your greatest skills and talents? How will you use these to contribute to your class as well as a study group?" One illustrative story about your career could answer both—and gives you more time to thoughtfully craft the body of your essay while tailoring smaller portions to each school.  Letters of Recommendation  At almost every business school, you're going to be required to submit letters of recommendation. With most programs, those letters are a free-form exercise: you ask a supervisor or mentor to write on your behalf and they can choose how to frame your work and experience. Note, however, that while most schools (i.e. Wharton, Kellogg and Yale to name a few) prefer at least one of your recommendation letters to come from your current or most recent role, this letter is separate from your letter of employer sponsorship.  When asking someone to write a recommendation, it's best to have a frank and open conversation before he or she begins writing. If he or she is especially familiar with a particular accomplishment of yours, remind your recommender to include it in their letter. Remember, when you're creating an application, you're trying to create a full picture of yourself to the admissions board—including a third party account of a specific moment in your career can be especially helpful. Moreover, you may be doing your recommender a favor: he or she may be unsure of where to start and resort to speaking in platitudes. Ultimately, your recommender may be grateful to have a bit of direction to get writing.  Some schools, like Chicago's Booth School or MIT have an online questionnaire for your recommenders to fill out. They might be asked to assess your ability to work with others in groups, your potential for "assuming major management responsibilities", and even list your professional limitations or weaknesses. Finding someone who can best answer to the entire breadth of your professional experience will be vital in succeeding on these types of recommendations.  In the end…  While writing essays and seeking recommendations might seem tedious and stress-inducing, remember that these could be your best moments to shine. GMAT scores and college transcripts might not give admissions teams the best and most favorable picture of who you are and what you can bring to your cohort. Embrace these opportunities to tell a story about yourself—and make sure it
AMOLED displays make a lot of sense on smartwatches that use always-on displays, as no pixels need to fire for the black parts of the screen (which many watch faces and wearable UIs lean heavily on) – perhaps resulting in better battery life. It's a little surprising, then, that Motorola has opted for an IPS panel for the second year in a row.
1 / 65 Ilea, Best Friends Animal Society  Spunky, sassy Ilea always has a smile on her face! She's a fun lass that adores playing in the yard and going on long walks. Ilea knows basic commands and since she's very eager to please (just look at that face!), she'd make a great student for future training. What Ilea needs is a savvy big-dog owner willing to invest some time and energy into helping her become the best dog she can be. If you're up to the task, you'll be rewarded with a best friend for life! Find out more from <a href="http://bestfriends.org/" target="_blank">Best Friends Animal Society</a>.  Best Friends Animal Society
"Adolescence, while it's a place I like to visit periodically, shouldn't be a lifestyle. Tragic maturity, while appropriate at times, will kill your soul if practiced perpetually."   "You could leg press, but that's gay." - Mark Rippetoe
The family of an inmate who died in a Milwaukee jail has reportedly filed a civil suit against Milwaukee County and Sheriff David Clarke.  According to the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, Clarke is one of numerous defendants named in the lawsuit over the 2016 death of inmate Terrill Thomas, who died from dehydration.  "The Estate of Terrill Thomas brings this action to hold Defendants accountable for subjecting Mr. Thomas to unconscionable pain and suffering and causing his death," the suit reportedly says.  ADVERTISEMENT  Terrill, who had been arrested in connection to a shooting, was placed in isolation after exhibiting signs of mental illness, the report said. Initial screeners at the facility had recommended Thomas be placed in the special needs unit.  "The change in Mr. Thomas' condition was obvious to every jail employee who looked into his cell, including multiple defendants. However, not a single one bothered to call for help until it was too late to save Mr. Thomas' life," the suit says, referring to Thomas's time in isolation.  The suit claims the individual defendants "acted objectively unreasonably and with deliberate indifference" to the risks they created, and that all their actions — and inactions — "were committed with intent, malice and reckless disregard" of Thomas's rights.  The compensatory and punitive damages the estate is seeking are unspecified.  This is the second federal civil rights case involving Thomas's death. In a March lawsuit claiming that the defendants were reckless and negligent, Thomas's two adult sons, one child and that child's mother, sued Milwaukee County, Clarke, three other sheriff's employees, Armor Correctional Health Services, and unnamed John Does.  A judge in June suspended the deadline for many of the defendants to answer the lawsuit until the plaintiffs file an amended complaint.  Clarke, who earlier this year claimed he had accepted a role in the Department of Homeland Security before reversing his acceptance, is an outspoken supporter of President Trump and spoke at the Republican National Convention.
You bite through the big wall, the big wall bites back  You just sit there and sulk, sit there and bawl  You are so pretty when you're on your knees  Disinfected, eager to please  Sometimes you sulk, sometimes you burn  God rest your soul  When the loving comes and we've already gone  Just like your dad, you'll never change  Each time it comes it eats me alive  I try to behave but it eats me alive  So I declare a holiday  Fall asleep, Drift away  Sometimes you sulk, sometimes you burn  God rest your soul  When the loving comes and we've already gone  Just like your dad, you'll never change  Sometimes you sulk, sometimes you burn  God rest your soul  When the loving comes and we've already gone  Just like your dad, You'll never change   SONG INFORMATION  Released: March 1995  Found on: The Bends  One of Thom's earliest creations, this song was inspired by a ruthless and unexplained killing spree conducted by a lone gunman in Hungerford, England, in 1987. Although its original concluding lyrics were "just shoot your gun," these were changed when the song was recorded in late 1994. This was because the death of Kurt Cobain was still weighing heavily on people's minds while the Hungerford killings were not; Thom chose to change the lyrics so that no one would think the song was about the late Nirvana leader. "Sulk" is rarely heard live: the band played it in concert a few times in 1994, even less often in 1995, and never again after that.
The national and regional job outlook and earnings for careers in information technology continue to be strong. Employees in this sector may possess a diverse or concentrated background in areas such as software and hardware development, mobile computing, data storage and analysis, information security, system administration and integration, computer networking, mathematics and science.  Students completing the Associate of Science (AS) emphasis in Information Systems Technology will be prepared with a diverse set of skills that include the fundamentals of software development. They can then transfer credits seamlessly to the University of Kansas, Edwards campus, to complete a Bachelor of Science in Information Technology in two additional years. Completion of the AS degree may help students obtain internships or entry-level jobs as they complete their bachelor's degree.  Important: Students graduating with an associate of science degree must complete an approved cultural diversity course. Some of the approved courses are able to meet both the cultural diversity requirement and a general education requirement. A list of approved cultural diversity courses can be found in the list of AS general education electives.  (Major Code 2940; State CIP Code 24.0101)  Associate of Science  First Semester  Second Semester  Third Semester  CS 235 Object-Oriented Programming Using C++* 4 CS 210 Discrete Structures I* 3 CIS 260 Database Management* 4 ECON 132 Survey of Economics 3 ^ 3 Total Hours 17  Fourth Semester  1 CS 250 Basic Data Structures using C++* 4 CS 211 Discrete Structures II* 3 PHYS 130 College Physics I* 5 ^ 3 Total Hours 16  Total Program Hours: 63
Song Ji Hyo and Byun Yo Han are confirmed to play the main roles for the new tvN Friday-Saturday drama titled "Ex-Girlfriend Club."  "Ex-Girlfriend Club" is romantic-comedy drama about a famous webtoon writer named Bang Myung Soo (Byun Yo Han's part) and his ex-girlfriends. Kim Soo Jin (Song Ji Hyo's part) is a producer who is assigned to make Bang Myung Soo's webtoon into a movie. Bang Myung Soo had written about his past dating experiences through his webtoons, including embarrassingly detailed stories of his ex-girlfriends. Bang Myung Soo and his ex-girlfriends gather in one place in order to make the movie.  The director of the drama, Kwon Jang Suk, is famous for directing dramas such as "Pasta," "Miss Korea," and "Golden Time."  "Ex-Girlfriend Club" is to start filming end of March and will first air beginning of May on Fridays and Saturdays at 8:30 p.m. KST
Kennedy Leigh – C'mere You Fuckin' Brat!  Released: August 23, 2014  Keiran Lee doesn't approve of all the time his daughter has been spending with her slutty friend Kennedy Leigh. As far as he's concerned, she's a bad influence, and the skimpy little outfits she wears aren't appropriate. But when he wakes up from a nap and finds her juicy teen ass shaking in his face, he can't help but get a little hard! Kennedy sees that bulge in his pants and pulls out his fat cock, giving him an unforgettable sloppy blowjob and letting him fuck her pretty face. She strokes the shaft and sucks on the balls, worshiping Keiran's big cock and spreading her legs to take it balls deep in her tight teen pussy. As he gives her a fat facial, Keiran finally changes his tune about Kennedy!.
Any chance of seeing a merge from drm-next-4.8-wip-si?  Good evening, I'd like to know how we should proceed about reporting bug on a development branch like drm-next-4.9-si. I've been able to build the branch without problem and even launch Xorg using its modesetting driver. However, there are some visual problems I'd like to report and/or track with people working on bringing GCN 1.0 (and 1.1) to the amdgpu driver (I'm able to compare the result of using radeon+modesetting VS amdgpu+modesetting to put aside bugs that could be related to modesetting itself). Cheers Alexandre Demers On 2016-08-01 17:14, Alex Deucher wrote: > On Mon, Aug 1, 2016 at 2:29 AM, Alexandre Demers > <alexandre.f.demers at gmail.com> wrote: >> Hi Alex, >> >> I'd like to know if there is any chance to see a merge / pull request for >> the SI code from drm-next-4.8-wip-si into mainline kernel for 4.8? Nothing >> seems to have been added to the branch since the end of May. I haven't seen >> any thing merged from that branch into drm-next-4.8(-wip) either. What is >> its status? Is it considered completed and ready for merge / test / tune up? >> >> As you know, I'm interested in helping on the task. However, I stopped any >> work on porting SI to amdgpu when I learned someone at AMD was working on >> it. It would have been too long for me to do it in comparison. Now, if I can >> be of any help, let me know, my R9 280X is waiting for some tests. > I just pushed an updated branch for 4.9: > https://cgit.freedesktop.org/~agd5f/linux/log/?h=drm-next-4.9-si > > Alex > >> Cheers, >> >> -- >> Alexandre Demers >> >> _______________________________________________ >> amd-gfx mailing list >> amd-gfx at lists.freedesktop.org >> https://lists.freedesktop.org/mailman/listinfo/amd-gfx
www.scarleton.com › HANDBAGS › Crossbody Bags Cached Similar  Rating: 4.5 - ‎17 reviews - ‎$49.99 - ‎In stock  Nice little purse for shopping, walks, etc. I do wish the back pocket was deeper for my Samsumg Note 5 cell phone. It only goes in halfway and falls out easily as I ...
The firm has a number of major K Street lobbying firms on the corporate list. | John Shinkle/POLITICO CAP releases donor list  The liberal think tank Center for American Progress on Friday revealed that it's funded by some of the country's largest and most powerful corporations, trade associations and lobbying firms.  Major donors to the group and its affiliate social welfare nonprofit Center for American Progress Action Fund include major retailers, energy interests, health care companies and other corporate actors who spend millions on lobbying and influence peddling in the nation's capital, according to a list posted on the center's website.  Story Continued Below  The group — which is a fundraising powerhouse that takes in about $40 million a year — released its donor list as founder and chairman John Podesta heads into the Obama White House to serve as a senior adviser.  Those corporations and trade associations represent a cross section of corporate America and include Walmart, Goldman Sachs, Google, defense giant Northrop Grumman, T-Mobile, Toyota, Visa, GE, among others. CAP did not disclose the donation amounts.  America's Health Insurance Plans, or AHIP — a major player in the health care debate contributed to the group, as did Hollywood's advocacy arm, the Motion Picture Association of America. Other corporate donors include Microsoft, PepsiCo, Samsung, CVS Caremark, Comcast NBCUniversal and many others.  The firm also has a number of major K Street lobbying firms on the corporate donor list including Akin Gump, the Glover Park Group, Livingston Group and the Downey McGrath Group. All represent dozens of corporate and nonprofit clients.  CAP officials stressed that Podesta personally was not involved in soliciting donations from many of those corporations — saying that he gave up his role in fundraising two years ago.  "I don't think he even knows who our corporate supporters are," CAP president Neera Tanden told POLITICO Thursday.  Podesta founded CAP in 2003 as a counterweight to conservative think tanks like the Heritage Foundation and the American Enterprise Institute. The group produces research reports and runs the popular liberal website ThinkProgress.  The release of CAP's donors also comes amid concerns about corporate influence peddling and think tanks.  Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.) — a darling of progressive activists — challenged banks and other financial institutions to fully disclosure their contributions to think tanks in a letter last week.
Overview Gallery   This article is about the map featured in Operation Breakout of Counter-Strike: Global Offensive. For the map creator also known as THE CASTLE, see Russell Meakim.  " Intense nighttime battles form in caves, the forest and room-to-room as terrorists attempt to destroy this historic castle built into the side of a mountain. "  ―Map Description[1]   Castle (de_castle) is a community created bomb defusal map designed by Yanzl and featured as part of Operation Breakout in Counter-Strike: Global Offensive.  On the October 13, 2016 update, the map was removed from the game files, making Castle inaccessible via console.  Contents show]  Overview  The map takes place in an old castle built into the side of a mountain, and features large open cave areas.  Trivia  The map is based on the Predjama Castle in Slovenia.  July 1, 2014 Added as part of the Operation Breakout update
With a low annual fee of $29, Capital One's Secured MasterCard is a great way to get back on the road to good credit.  While most secured cards give you a spending limit equal to the amount you deposit, this card is essentially a hybrid between a secured card and a regular credit card, making it one of the best picks for a customer looking to get back into the traditional credit card world, said Ben Woolsey, director of marketing and research at CreditCards.com.  You can put in as little as $49 and still get a credit line of $200 with this card. If you deposit more money -- like $99 or $200 -- you can increase your credit line up to $3,000.  Another big perk, said Woolsey, is that once you have established a positive credit history and improved your credit score, you're able to qualify and apply for one of the issuer's many unsecured cards.  There is one drawback, however: The card comes with a 22.9% APR, which is high for a secured card.   NEXT: Orchard Bank cards
Singer Byul has revealed the gender of her child due next April through Instagram on October 24, with a lovely shot of her and her son Dream walking hand-in-hand.  Along with the photo, she leaves a fond dedication for Dream, which reads, "Dream, while raising you, Mom has been feeling a happiness that cannot be expressed in words. I'm so thankful to be your mother♡ When your baby brother is born soon, may he grow up to be as kind and lovely as you."  She continues, "Let's stay even more healthy and happy. I love you and wish more blessings upon you, Dream♡ Congratulations on becoming a big brother."  드림아. 엄마는 드림이를 키우며. 정말 말로 다 할수없는 큰 행복을 느끼며살아. 드림이의 엄마라서 참 감사하고 또 감사해♡ 곧 태어날 동생도 우리 드림이 만큼만 착하고 이쁘게 커주면 좋겠다. 우리 더 건강하구.행복하자. 사랑하고 축복해 드림아♡ 형님된거 축하해♡ A photo posted by 뵬 (@sweetstar0001) on Oct 24, 2016 at 2:16am PDT  Haha is also receiving the well-wishes of fans through his Instagram post where he excitedly announces that their second child is a boy.  He wrote, "I'm feeling great~!!! It's a boy!!! Kyakyakyakya. I'll raise you courageously! Ya man! #RichWithSons #ALittleDaytimeDrink #IShouldLiveDiligently~!!! Are my eyes… a little sad…?"  기분좋네~!!!!! 아들입니다!!! 캬캬캬캬캬캬캬캬캬 용감한형제로 키울게요~!!! 야만!!!!! #아들부자 #살짝 낮술 #열심히살아야지~!!! 눈이….사알짝 슬프나…?? A photo posted by ha dong hoon (@quanhaha79) on Oct 23, 2016 at 11:23pm PDT  The couple was married in 2012 and had their first son Dream in July the following year.  Congratulations to the happy family!  Source (1)
Like many IWW members in the UK I work in the public sector. Traditionally this has been an area of high trade union density particularly in teaching, the civil service and health. It is also one of the last bastions of collective bargaining power for the trade union movement. Although as the recent record of capitulation to austerity policies, cuts in pay and cuts in social services shows trade union density rarely equals trade union militancy.  "Dual carding" – membership in a craft union alongside the IWW – is a relatively underdeveloped strategy for the UK. In spite of a reputation for "minority unionism" Wobblies have historically played animating roles in trade unions aside their commitment to building a combative and revolutionary alternative to craft union structures. The IWW, after all, was the product of an amalgamation of the most militant and advanced expressions of the trade union movement of the time.  In spite of this it would also be simplistic to say that membership in the IWW and activity in a broader trade union is fully harmonious. The IWW does ultimately exist as a criticism of the limitations of craft unionism and its reformist methods. Many leftists labour under the illusion that trade unions can be captured and turned towards revolutionary aims. In practice this has often meant running left leadership slates for union elections. A practice that is neither appealing to Wobblies nor has proved particularly successful in terms of shifting the actual activity of trade unions. An equally common approach is to stoke rank-and-file militancy at the branch level, either through the building of left caucuses or networks of militant reps. This seems like a more natural approach for a Wobbly to take promoting those qualities and methods that we see as valuable in syndicalist organising – militancy, activism from the roots, bottom-up over top-down etc.  Yet this approach also has its limitations. The structure and organisation of the trade unions can undercut struggles even at the rank-and-file level. Just like any experienced organiser should prepare strategies for dealing with a difficult and divisive boss, a dual-carder needs to anticipate and prepare for the possibility that trade union bureaucracies will undermine the work of militant organisers and remove them from a position of influence with the membership if they see them as troublesome or a threat. Our aims should also go beyond simply organising more militant and combative trade unions. We need to understand how our activities as trade unionists help to sow the seeds of workers' control in our industries in addition to building links with those in unorganised sectors and supporting our fellow workers growing IWW campaigns.  I recently had the opportunity to act as a representative for my local NUT (National Union of Teachers) branch, below are a number of observations developed from experimenting with this new role. My aim is that these offer a contribution to some of the issues that are raised above as part of a broader debate on dual-carding in the union:  1. Debunking the myth of the "militant union rep" – building a militant membership  It is a widespread view within trade union branches that it's reps who should do most of the leg-work. This perception is reinforced by the fact that the majority of union resources, communication and, most importantly, meetings with management happen exclusively through the rep. The result is that workmates will talk more or less favourably about "bolshie reps" who are capable/incapable of standing up to management on their behalf. This is a bottle-neck in collective strength that a boss can easily exploit to demobilise, distract or diffuse the activity of the union. Good reps need to send the message out that it's the membership that calls the shots and not them. A step towards building a new union culture on this basis is bringing workmates into these otherwise exclusive communication channels. Dual-carders should share rep guides and union resources, carefully minute meetings with management, show how issues raised have been actioned and insist that problems are raised collectively through regular branch meetings and not via private communication with the rep. Even in recognised workplaces workers need to be educated on the idea that the union is only as strong as its membership and a poorly organised union can easily fall into a forum of consultation with management or even be de-recognised.  2. The branch is not a social space – so make one.  Trade union branches are generally very poorly organised. This does create opportunities for dual-carders in terms of introducing more democratic and inclusive processes without much institutional resistance. But in the absence of such clear structures meetings can often just be collective moaning sessions that can be tiring and demobilising for those involved. It is, of course, important for people to blow off steam especially in stressful professions but this shouldn't come at the expense of collective action. So why not create alternative spaces to do that? In the North we have been experimenting with this kind of model for young professionals in teaching. Our "Educators Underground"
"Productiveness is your acceptance of morality, your recognition of the fact that you choose to live — that productive work is the process by which man's consciousness controls his existence, a constant process of acquiring knowledge and shaping matter to fit one's purpose, of translating an idea into physical form, of remaking the earth in the image of one's values — that all work is creative work if done by a thinking mind, and no work is creative if done by a blank who repeats in uncritical stupor a routine he has learned from others — that your work is yours to choose, and the choice is as wide as your mind, that nothing more is possible to you and nothing less is human — that to cheat your way into a job bigger than your mind can handle is to become a fear-corroded ape on borrowed motions and borrowed time, and to settle down into a job that requires less than your mind's full capacity is to cut your motor and sentence yourself to another kind of motion: decay — that your work is the process of achieving your values, and to lose your ambition for values is to lose your ambition to live — that your body is a machine, but your mind is its driver, and you must drive as far as your mind will take you, with achievement as the goal of your road — that the man who has no purpose is a machine that coasts downhill at the mercy of any boulder to crash in the first chance ditch, that the man who stifles his mind is a stalled machine slowly going to rust, that the man who lets a leader prescribe his course is a wreck being towed to the scrapheap, and the man who makes another man his goal is a hitchhiker no driver should ever pick up — that your work is the purpose of your life, and you must speed past any killer who assumes the right to stop you, that any value you might find outside your work, any other loyalty or love, can be only travelers you choose to share your journey and must be travelers going on their own power in the same direction." ― Ayn Rand
Description  MAX'S Anabolic Night is Australia best-selling night protein. It provides up to 8 hours of continuous protein release to keep you recovering and growing all night. Up to 60% of new muscle growth occurs while you sleep – if you give your body the right nutrients. Don't waste your hard hours in the gym with poor night time nutrition - Use Anabolic Night and wake up bigger!
From DISC Wiki  This is an ID format used by the game to identify systems and stellar bodies. The ID is represented as a 64-bit integer.  Format  The ID is effectively a structure, with different parts of the bitfield representing different aspects of the system's features.  These parts are:  Mass code (3 bits) - the mass code of the system, with a = 0 through to h = 7  (3 bits) - the mass code of the system, with a = 0 through to h = 7 Z boxel (0-7 bits) - the Z boxel (within-sector) coordinate of the system  (0-7 bits) - the Z boxel (within-sector) coordinate of the system Z sector (7 bits) - the Z sector coordinate of the system  (7 bits) - the Z sector coordinate of the system Y boxel (0-7 bits) - the Y boxel (within-sector) coordinate of the system  (0-7 bits) - the Y boxel (within-sector) coordinate of the system Y sector (6 bits) - the Y sector coordinate of the system  (6 bits) - the Y sector coordinate of the system X boxel (0-7 bits) - the X boxel (within-sector) coordinate of the system  (0-7 bits) - the X boxel (within-sector) coordinate of the system X sector (7 bits) - the X sector coordinate of the system  (7 bits) - the X sector coordinate of the system N2 (11-32 bits) - the N2 number (within-boxel identifier) of the system  (11-32 bits) - the N2 number (within-boxel identifier) of the system Body ID (9 bits) - the ID of the body within the system; for systems this is always 0 (representing the arrival star)  Note that the X/Y/Z boxel coordinates and the N2 number have variable sizes; this is because the amount of space taken by these pieces of data is different depending on the mass code.  The following image shows the bitfield for each mass code:  Example  Take the system Eol Prou RS-T d3-94.   First up, this system has a mass code of d, which is 3 in the bitfield. Additionally, we can immediately say that the body ID is 0, since this ID64 is just for a system.  To fill in more, we'll need to identify more about the system and the sector it's in.  The Eol Prou sector has an origin of [-10305, -1305, 19415], or in the internal galaxy coordinate space, [39680, 39680, 43520]. This puts it as sector [31, 31, 34].  Additionally, we know the system's N2 - it's the last number in the system name, 94.  We've almost got everything we need - but we still need the X, Y and Z boxel coordinates.  These can be found by interpreting the rest of the system name (Eol Prou RS-T d3-94); this comes out as boxel ID 66057, with coordinates [9, 4, 4].  We now have a full 64-bit identifier, which in binary is 0000000000000000000000101111000111111001011111010001000100100011, as an integer is 3238296097059, or in hex is 000002F1F97D1123.  Use  The format first became visible with the release of E:D 2.2, as it is used in the VisitedStarsCache data file used to track which stars the player has visited.  It is also used when storing the current active route between game sessions; this is how the stellar body part at the top end of the ID was discovered (since you are able to set a route to planets/stations).
A comprehensive internationalization solution for Meteor  Internationalization for Meteor  tap-i18n is a Meteor package that provides a comprehensive i18n solution for Meteor apps and packages, with the goal of standardizing the way package developers internationalize their packages.  Watch a talk about tap:i18n & tap:i18n-db  Get involved in tap:i18n:  Developed by Professional Meteor Services  for Leading Conference Technology.  Related Packages:  Check tap:i18n-db for Meteor collections internationalization.  Check tap:i18n-ui for bootstrap based UI components for tap:i18n.  Check tap:i18n-bundler for Cordova & static file deployments.  Users of tap-i18n v0.9 and below, read tap:i18n v1.0 New Features & Backward Compatibility and update your app to v1.0 .  Contents  Key Features  All Encompassing  tap-i18n is designed in a way that distinguishes the role of the package developer, that is, making the package available in multiple languages, from the role of the app developer which is to translate the app, but more importantly, to manage the app's internationalization aspects, such as: setting the supported languages for the project, setting the client language, configuring CDNs for language files, and so on.  Readable Syntax  < div class = " btn " > {{ _ " sign_up " }} </ div >  Advanced i18n  tap-i18n uses i18next v1.11 as its internationalization engine and exposes all its capabilities to the Meteor's templates - variables, dialects, count/context aware keys, and more.  client/messages.html  < template name = " messages_today " > < p > {{ _ " inbox_status " " Daniel " count = 18 }} </ p > </ template >  i18n/en.i18n.json  { " inbox_status " : " Hey, %s! You have received one new message today. " , " inbox_status_plural " : " Hey, %s! You have received %s new messages today. " }  See more examples below.  Transparent Namespacing  You don't need to worry about domain prefixing or package conflicts when you translate your project or package. Behind the scenes we automatically generate scoped namespaces for you.  Ready to Scale  Translations are unified into a single JSON file per language that includes both package and project-level translations  On-demand: translations are loaded only when they are needed  3rd Party CDN Support  Quickstart  Step 1: Install tap-i18n using meteor:  $ meteor add tap:i18n  Step 2: Add translation helpers to your markup:  *.html  < div > {{ _ " hello " }} </ div >  Step 3: Define translations in JSON or YAML format:  i18n/en.i18n.json  { " hello " : " Hey there " }  i18n/fr.i18n.json  { " hello " : " Bonjour " }  i18n/es.i18n.yml  hello : Hola  Translations files should end with lang_tag.i18n.json/yml.  You can split translations of a certain language to multiple files, we ignore the prefixed text, e.g., we add the translations of menu.en.i18n.json in the same way we add those of en.i18n.json .  You can put languages files anywhere in your project tree, as long as they are common to both your server and client - do not put languages files under /client, /server or /public.  Note: Languages files have to be saved in utf-8 encoding.  Step 4: Initiate the client language on startup (optional)  If you want the client to be served by a specific language on startup  Assuming that you have a function getUserLanguage() that returns the language for tag for the current user.  getUserLanguage = function () { // Put here the logic for determining the user language return " fr " ; }; if ( Meteor . isClient ) { Meteor . startup ( function () { Session . set ( " showLoadingIndicator " , true ); TAPi18n . setLanguage ( getUserLanguage ()) . done ( function () { Session . set ( " showLoadingIndicator " , false ); }) . fail ( function ( error_message ) { // Handle the situation console
1 please donate through paypal - twdrts.calculator@gmail.com - I have put many hours into this and the littest of donations help! -- I have recevied $8 thus far....  2 created by Refihawk - server TROUP  3 To use the calculator: Select File - "Make a Copy" -- you can then use the one on your google drive  4 note: you can not move from one Tier to another (ex. T3-01 --> T4-50) instead you do this as 2 rows (ex. T3-01 --> T3-70; T4-01 --> T4-50, using the character twice)  5 Anything in yellow/orange needs to be changed... eveyrthing else is left alone  6 at the bottom of the page is a "summary" of everyting, do not forget to check it out... it is the most important thing. Also, learn how to filter, it will make this sheet very easy to use.  7 character name as 5* or 4* as TX-XX as TX-XX do not edit do not edit do not edit do not edit do not edit do not edit do not edit  8 Name Persona Trait Type Stars Current Lvl Desired Lvl Tier Pts per lvl PTS 2* Characters Food Exp Needed Total Lvl Ups  9 example Citizen Alert Range 5* t3-01 t3-70 t3 1000 69000 225 5,223,900 104,787 69  10 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  11 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  12 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  13 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  14 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  15 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  16 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  17 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  18 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  19 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  20 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  21 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  22 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  23 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  24 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  25 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  26 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  27 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  28 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  29 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  30 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  31 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  32 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  33 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  34 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  35 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  36 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  37 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  38 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  39 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  40 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  41 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  42 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  43 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  44 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  45 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  46 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  47 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  48 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  49 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  50 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  51 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  52 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  53 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  54 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  55 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  56 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  57 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  58 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  59 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  60 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  61 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  62 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  63 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  64 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  65 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  66 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  67 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  68 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  69 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  70 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  71 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  72 #REF! 0 0 0 0 0  73 #REF! 0 0 0
GROSS=> ANTIFA Throw Bottles of URINE at Boston Police Officers (VIDEO)  The Boston Police Department is calling on Antifa to immediately cease throwing urine at its officers. " # BPD is asking individuals to refrain from throwing urine, bottles and other harmful projectiles at our officers." tweeted the Boston Police Department.  Boston Police Commissioner confirms bottles filled with urine were thrown at officers during protest.  Boston Police Commissioner says bottles filled with urine were thrown at officers during protest https://t.co/srYfo8OheR pic.twitter.com/a9B52iZ1sa — CBS News (@CBSNews) August 19, 2017  Reporter Michele McPhee tweeted a photo of Antifa members, writing "Counterprotesters have been asked by @bostonpolice to stop assaulting cops with bottles of urine etc".  Counterprotesters have been asked by @bostonpolice to stop assaulting cops with bottles of urine etc pic.twitter.com/o81oqdBVOH — Michele McPhee (@MicheleMcPhee) August 19, 2017  #BPD is asking individuals to refrain from throwing urine, bottles and other harmful projectiles at our officers. — Boston Police Dept. (@bostonpolice) August 19, 2017  Twitter users @meequalsfree tweeted a video of a Boston Antifa member with urine on his person.  "@DeplorableGoldn this man has defaced Our American Flag by writing all over it. He has placed a gorilla mask on and has urine"  @DeplorableGoldn this man has defaced Our American Flag by writing all over it. He has placed a gorilla mask on and has urine pic.twitter.com/MxnYEC2Fz4 — Michael (@meequalsfree) August 19, 2017  A grey-haired woman holding a large American flag was attacked in Boston Saturday as she stood alongside a march of Alt-Left counter-protesters to a Free Speech rally being held on Boston Common.  Video posted by Fox News shows an Antifa terrorist grabbing the flag from the woman and then dragging her for about ten yards as she tries to hold on to her flag. Eventually the Antifa terrorist lets go of the flag and the woman tumbles to the ground as a man she was standing with a male companion catches up to her. The woman gets up and chases after the Antifa terrorist while her friend gathers up the flag.  Nobody with the Alt-Left protesters comes to the aid of the grey-haired woman being dragged across the Common.  The woman reaches a crowd of Antifa terrorists and starts to confront them. Her male companion and another man catch up and pull her back from the mob. The woman is then seen reacting emotionally as the men gently set her on the grass.  https://twitter.com/FoxNews/status/898939777453400065?ref_src=twsrc% 5Etfw&ref_url=http% 3A% 2F% 2Fwww.thegatewaypundit.com% 2F2017% 2F08% 2Fvideo-antifa-attacks-woman-holding-american-flag-boston-drags-across-boston-common% 2F
Digital journalist warns returning students to prepare for online bullying after eight rape threats a day  Updated  A digital journalist is warning parents to prepare their children for bullying on social media as they start the new school year with fresh laptops and mobile devices.  US-based video games journalist Alanah Pearce, originally from Brisbane, regularly receives abuse and rape threats online and said she had several ways of dealing with trolls.  "Sometimes people will send me a message on Facebook and if it's a particularly bad thing I will go to their profile, I'll look through their Facebook [page] and find their family, their work or their school and I'll send them a screenshot of what has been sent to me," she said.  "I'm basically telling someone who I think is an authority figure in that person's life what this person is doing online, so there can be some real [consequences]."  Primary school boy threatened rape  Ms Pearce said she received eight rape threats in one day last week.  She said contacting parents of the offenders was the most effective way of dealing with them.  Once people start to put how depressed they are or how ugly they feel online, then that will attract the trolls. That's why they say 'don't feed the trolls'. Dr Rachael Sharman, University of the Sunshine Coast  "One person in particular I contacted and showed her a rape threat her son had sent me, and he was a very young boy as well; he was only in primary school," she said.  "[His mother] made him hand in his device and took his internet privileges off him for a while.  "[She also] called a meeting with parents at the school to help parents get educated on how kids should act online normally."  Ms Pearce said she struggled to deal with online bullying when a school student but had taught herself to be more resilient.  She suspected trolls were essentially seeking attention so teaching children to ignore them could be very effective.  "Kids care about followers, which needs to be drilled out of them," she said.  No visible reactions, so no consequences says expert  University of the Sunshine Coast lecturer in psychology Dr Rachael Sharman agrees with Ms Pearce's technique of reporting trolls to their parents.  "Part of the issue with social media is you're disconnected; you don't see reaction, so there are no consequences," she said.  "If a 12-year-old boy walked up to a woman and told her he wanted to rape her, he wouldn't get away with it."  She said research had shown many Facebook users struggled to make real relationships offline.  "They've got friends online but don't know how to approach a real person in the real world," Dr Sharman said.  "It's very tricky for the average person, let alone someone on the computer."  Dr Sharman said parents should be aware of their child's social media activity depending on their age.  "I believe the computer or digital device should be in a public room in the home, just to make sure they're not becoming involved in troll [with trolls]," she advised.  She said people who published emotional problems on social media should be particularly concerned about online bullying.  "Once people start to put how depressed they are or how ugly they feel online, then that will attract the trolls," she said.  "That's why they say don't feed the trolls."  Advice for children and parents  Ms Pearce offered the following advice for parents and their children when using social media:  Learn to care less what your followers on social media think  Only follow your close friends on social media rather than everyone in the class or at school  Keep a private profile for people you trust  Parents should actively manage a child's page  Consider using a nickname rather than a real name and do not add a location or an age  Do not respond to trolls  Document every abusive message  Beware of additional content stored in photographs  Give usernames to the school so they can monitor social media  Topics: social-media, secondary-schools, family-and-children, women, primary-schools, maroochydore-4558  First posted
Attack: Deal physical damage to one target. Inferno: Deal heavy fire damage to all targets. Inferno (interrupt): Deal fire damage to one target. Blaze : Deal heavy damage to all targets, proportional to HP. Firaga (Counter) : Deal heavy fire damage to all targets. (trigger: physical attacks) Raise (Counter) : Revive all KO'd targets. (trigger: fire attacks)  Attack: Deal physical damage to one target. Inferno: Deal massive fire damage to one target. Inferno (all): Deal heavy fire damage to all targets. Inferno (interrupt): Deal massive fire damage to one target. Blaze : Deal heavy damage to all targets, proportional to HP. Firaga (Counter) : Deal heavy fire damage to one target. (trigger: physical attacks) Raise (Counter) : Revive all KO'd targets. (trigger: fire attacks)  Attack: Deal physical damage to one target. Inferno: Deal massive fire damage to one target. Inferno (all): Deal heavy fire damage to all targets. Firaga : Deal heavy fire damage to one target. Firaga (Counter) : Deal heavy fire damage to all targets . (trigger: physical attacks) Raise (Counter) : Revive all KO'd targets. (trigger: fire attacks)  Attack: Deal physical damage to one target. Inferno: Deal massive fire damage to one target. Inferno (all): Deal heavy fire damage to all targets. Blaze : Deal heavy damage to all targets, proportional to HP. Firaga (Counter) : Deal heavy fire damage to one target. (trigger: physical attacks) Raise (Counter) : Revive all KO'd targets. (trigger: fire attacks)
John Oliver is given a fun, and funky, stylized look as an adorable collectible vinyl figure!  Pop! Television 312  3 3/4" tall  Vinyl  Imported  By Funko  Paypal is currently not accepted on Presale and Backorder items.
Backstage at the photoshoot of the charismatic girl group  A close-up of the cute fresh faces of the beautiful SNSD members  Glamorous meets fabulous beauty  Translated by: Kkabbekky@soshified.com and arghninja@soshified.com  Source: snsdchina.net  They debuted in August 2007 in Korea.In 2009, SNSD set a new record of being number 1 for 9 consecutive weeks on the Korean music program, KBS Music Bank, and dominated as the top girl group. They also topped various music charts in Taiwan, Thailand and the Philippines. They held an Asian tour in China and Taiwan and are active as the number one girl group all over Asia. With the release of the DVD 'New beginning of Girls' Generation' in August 2010, they finally landed in Japan. The buyers of this DVD were invited to Ariaki Coliseum, where they held their first showcase. The showcase became a hot topic because they garnered 22.000 fans. In September, they released their Japanese debut single, 'Genie', and it reached number 4 on the Oricon chart ranking. This is the highest ranking ever for a debut single of a foreign female artist. Their second debut single 'Gee', released in October, reached number 1 on the daily ranking, and they obtained number 1 spots on many online music distribution charts. 'Gee' became an instant hit. SNSD are well on their way to take over the Japanese music scene.At the start of the interview the girls got ready and greeted us with ''We are SNSD. Please take care of us!'' in fluent Japanese. They're definitely energetic. It's a pity that this time Tiffany couldn't join them because of her injury, however the 8 cute girls with the average age of 21 years old are able to overwhelm you only with their brightness and liveliness.In Japan, the Kpop boom shows an unprecedented peak. Waiting for that opportunity to rise, SNSD, the top girl group in Korea, released the single 'Genie' and accomplished their Japanese debut in September 2010.The 9 members dance in perfect order and have an outstanding singing ability. They wear outfits that accentuate their great style. The girls' overwhelming presence sets them apart from the rest of the K-pop idols. One of the main reasons of their popularity is the power of the members unity. The moodmaker Hyoyeon says, ' We often quarrel, but when the others encourage for 'more!' they get embarrassed, and make up (laughs).'' On their days off, they go out to shop or watch a movie. Sooyoung comments on this relation as, ''more than members, we are close friends''. That closeness gets reflected without a doubt in their beautiful synchronized dance.SNSD's trait is that each member holds an individual charming personality. For instance, like this time when they set foot in the pink make-up room, which we made in the studio especially for this photoshoot. Pink is also SNSD's theme color and they got excited at once and they exclaimed,''Cute!'', on the pink interior. Yoona, who does things on her own pace, continued to take selcas of herself in front of the mirror. Mischievous Taeyeon made funny poses with a rhinestone cane. Jessica, whose modeling intuition is good, made cute poses one after another as if knowing when the camera shutter is going to go off. Serious Seohyun continued holding onto the hat even without the cameraman telling her to hold it. Even with just one of those reactions, each personality can be seen. That SNSD's charm is like the example Tiffany gave, ''Even if you eat each separately, they are a delicious fruit or candy, but if you make it into a 'SNSD' dessert, it becomes even more delicious," and it's exactly right. In 2011, their activities in Japan will finally be in full swing. With what look will SNSD fascinate the Japanese fans next and will they lead the next generation?The owner of a perfect style and smileBorn in '90. With her height of 170cm, her attractive features are her long slender legs. She's the most fluent in Japanese amongst the members and answered the entire interview in Japanese. For studying purposes she often watches Japanese TV programs and movies. Her favorite drama's are 'Hotaru no Hikari' and 'Buzzer Beat'. At the end of the photoshoot the staff gave everyone fluffy pajamas; she was delighted and said 'I wanted pajamas like this one!' ''This year I want to meet the Japanese fans. And privately, I want to go to Santorini in Greece.''A reader who is totally caught up with "1Q84" by Haruki MurakamiBorn in '89. Sunny, whose sole hobby is reading, even reads Murakami Haruki
'Designated Survivor' Seasons 1 & 2 Move From Hulu To Netflix Ahead Of Season 3 Release  By Dino-Ray Ramos  After being resurrected from its cancellation at ABC, Designated Survivor has officially packed its briefcase and is moving seasons 1 and 2 to Netflix from its home at Hulu. The move comes after it was announced the political drama would get a third season at the streaming giant. The news is ahead of the release of season 3. Originally, Hulu had U.S. SVOD rights to the first two seasons of Designated Survivor, which was originally on ABC. With the new Netflix deal… Read
Flame On :: Episode 137 :: Strange Elections and Where to Find Drinks  Posted by Bryan on November 25, 2016  Flame ON! is the all-gay, all-geek podcast. Tune in as we dish on the latest in pop and queer culture!  The boys of FO! have a lot on their minds – beginning with the fallout of the 2016 elections and the effects felt throughout our community. We shed light on how it has affected us and put the call out for everyone in earshot to join us in stepping it up to make sure the US is fair and equal for everyone!  From that sobering topic, we take a refreshing plunge into the world of pop culture including blockbuster movies Arrival and Doctor Strange, the Fall television season so far, Genital Jousting (it's as funny as it sounds!), Pokemon Sun and Moon, and what comics are at the top of our buy piles right now!  Download from the player above | Subscribe via iTunes  Theme:  Social Links:  About Bryan  Just a 30-something coder/musician/gardener with a penchant for all things gay and geeky. Creator/Host of the Flame ON! podcast!
Fantastic, addictive turn-based tactical gameplay with some role-playing elements  Tons of authentic weapons and equipment, complete with descriptions  An additional scenario plus a campaign editor to quell your hunger for more Jagged Alliance  The smoke is clearing and the bullets have stopped flying. Arulco is free at last, but your job's not over. An all-powerful corporation is assaulting the tiny country and, once again, you are needed!Enter a whole new chapter of the critically acclaimed Jagged Alliance 2 with new weapons (10 new ones including models of sniper and assault rifles), new mercenaries (10 new characters), new terrain (including snow), an Iron Man mode and the fantastic new Mission Builder!Gear up - you have got some Unfinished Business to take care of!Jagged Alliance 2: Unfinished Business is a standalone game that can be played without Jagged Alliance 2. You can import your character from Jagged Alliance 2. The game also comes with the campaign editor.  Jagged Alliance is a registered trademark of Sir-tech Software, Inc. Reg'd TM Canada. © 1996 by Sir-tech Software, Inc. All rights reserved.
Tuesday night, Scott Rabalais of The Advocate in Baton Rouge set the internet ablaze.  Rabalais reported that there are "strong indications" that Les Miles is coaching for his job these next two weeks (at Ole Miss tomorrow and vs. Texas A&M next weekend). As we at FootballScoop know quite well, when you write an article like that, you fairly quickly are told by powers in the know that you are right…or wrong.  Rabalais updated things today with a note along those same lines…noting that he was right (according to "sources with knowledge of the unfolding situation").  Rabalais notes that there are three major scenarios in play.  LSU wins out – In which case Les is "clearly safe"; however Rabalais adds that staff changes could be in the offing. LSU loses out – "There is little chance Miles would be allowed to return". LSU splits these two games – Many shades of gray. Poker. This could go in any direction and the gloves might come off.  Miles' buyout is $15 million if he is let go prior to January 1, at which time it drops to $12.9 million. Throw in another $2 million for the assistants (per Rabalais) and perhaps another $5 million to secure the new staff…and oh my this would the riskiest move Joe Alleva has ever recommended in his life. Better be right Joe.
"Redneck Neighbor"  Page last edited on April 11, 2002  In case you're wondering, this Web page is about my next-door neighbors. Since my neighbors have been driving me crazy and no amount of civilized reasoning and/or negotiations have worked - I have decided to dedicate a small corner of cyber-space to them.  My family and friends are constantly asking me to tell them the "latest" thing my neighbor has done so this page will save me from repeating myself. Besides, I thought it would be fun. Everything you read here is entirely true, that's what makes it so funny. Enjoy!  Background:  My neighbors moved into the house next to ours in October 1997. It's a brand new neighborhood with new houses. Everyone's house looks beautiful but that's about to change. The new neighbors seem like normal people until shortly after they move in (more later).  First, let me say that my redneck neighbor is not destitute or under-privileged. The guy owns a business, drives VERY nice new cars, he just doesn't care about his house. In order to protect the ignorant, we'll call him John Doe # 8 or JD8 for short.  October 1997 - They are here!  Well, it should have been a sign of things to come but my neighbors move into their brand new house. Inventory: 1 artificial Christmas tree, clothes, stereo system, TV, no furniture). The Christmas tree is nicely decorated (remember, it's October). We can tell what the tree looks like because the windows have no miniblinds so at night, you can see right into the house as you drive up. They have also decided to wrap some strands of Christmas lights around their front porch railing. I guess there's no electric outlet nearby because they never turn these lights on.  October 1997 - 1st Home beautification project  It's dark outside, I'm standing in front of my house and my neighbor does the following: He gets in his car, drives it up to the house on the other side of my house (this house is still being built). He backs his car up to the construction site and opens the trunk. He calmly proceeds to load up the trunk with bricks and 2x4s. Pretty clever, huh?  The following night, at around 9:00pm he decides it's time to build a mailbox post. It's very nice. He used the stolen 2x4s from the previous night. It looks like it's made out of 2x4s except he didn't steal any that were long enough so he nails a couple of them together to get the correct height - I mean, it has to look just right! The mailbox post is not very sturdy so he braces it with an additional 2x4 (at an angle). Click here to see the mailbox (no bracing 2x4 though).  He uses the bricks as edging for his flower beds. They look nice. Especially with the newly planted bamboo trees and the ten gallon fish tank (no fish, just water).  November 1997 - The fence!  I wake up to my wife telling me, "Hey, it looks like JD8 is working on a fence". Well I don't think much of it until she tells me that he's trying to build a fence around the entire house (front and back) and that the fence is going to be chain-link. We have some "covenant rules" that prohibit you from putting up a silver chain-link fence. Also, you cannot have any fence go past the back of your house. By now, I am freaking out. I can see the property value falling faster than his mailbox post.  Anyway, I get to work and at 9:01AM I call our builder. I explain the situation to him and he agrees to pay JD8 a visit before the concrete around the metal posts dries. Sure enough, I get home after work and the posts around the front of the house are laying on the street. Not exactly what I expected but at least they're out of the ground. Tragedy is averted for now.  A few days later I realize he's not putting up chain-link but "chicken wire". Call # 2 to the builder. While talking on the phone, the builder starts referring to the neighbor in a less-than-amicable fashion – someone else on my side!  By that afternoon, the fence is chain-link again. The top of the fence looks like a wave (he didn't want to spend the 6 bucks on a level), and the sides look like an S. Very crafty guy. Total estimated fence cost: $250.00 - but wait! -- He didn't set all the metal posts in concrete! Actual cost: $62.50. You get the idea here.  Sometime after the fence  Well, it's time to give Cujo
>From nntp.hut.fi!news.funet.fi!sunic!EU.net!howland.reston.ans.net!vixen.cso.uiuc.edu!laff Tue Jun 07 15:23:20 EET DST 1994  Article: 25134 of alt.sex.stories  Path: nntp.hut.fi!news.funet.fi!sunic!EU.net!howland.reston.ans.net!vixen.cso.uiuc.edu!laff  From: laff@sal.cs.uiuc.edu (Joshua A Laff)  Newsgroups: alt.sex.stories  This story is another from the archives, and is not written by me. Requests for just about anything concerning these posts will be ignored. See the FAQ in a.s.s.d for more information. And stop sending talk requests. Even when I'm logged in to this posting site, I usually have the window closed, and if I don't, it's because I'm WORKING  S T A R T R E K - The Nude Generation   Known Name This Story Starring: Jean-Luc Picard  William Riker  Beverly Crusher  Deanna Troi  Geordi LaForge  Worf  Mr. Data  Long-Luc Dickhard  William Rideher  Cleverly Crusher  Doyouwanna Try  Geordi TheLarge  Whoref  Master Beta Also With: Guinan  Westly Crusher  Cheif O'Brien  Keiko  Ensign Ro  Guynone  Chestly Crusher  Cheif O'Guyin  Kinko  Ensign Blo  Special Guests: Lwuxana Troi  Mr. Homm  Dr. Leah Brahms  Q  3 of 5 (Borg - Hue) Coxonna Try  Mr. Hung  Dr. Leah Brahms (same)  Fuc-Q  Huege  "Captain's Log - star date 42193.2. We are currently en-route to the Smegma system where we have a scheduled rendezvous with the Star Cruiser Rocksoff. There, we will be taking aboard Mrs. Coxonna Try and Dr. Leah Brahms who are both returning to Star Base 69."  Meanwhile, Chestly Crusher is alone in his mother's quarters browsing through the latest issue of 'Girls Over 40'. "Oooooh", he moans as his self service intensifies. His stroking becomes faster, his grip tighter, his member rock hard. Suddenly an intense rush of pleasure sweeps over him... as does a stream of his cum. "Yuk! Damn! I can't believe I did that again". Wiping himself off with his mother's towel he stowes the magazine under his bed. He finds himself exhausted and lays down to rest.  Ten-Forward is relatively quiet. Guynone is behind the bar having a philosophical conversation with Whoref. "What I'm saying, Whoref, is that I just don't feel attracted to men". He moves back slightly on his stool, "I don't understand. That is unnatural. There must be something wrong with you". Guynone recognizes the emphasis placed on "Wrong".  "Listen, Whoref, don't be so quick to judge what you don't understand. I realize you Klingons consider yourselves the 'Studs' of the galaxy, but some species prefer a soft touch to the hard, barbaric pounding you have to offer".  "You wouldn't know anything about what I have to offer!" Whoref snaps back. During his rebuttal Whoref pulls down the lower portion of his uniform revealing the extent of his Klingon heritige. Guynone's eyes bulge out of their sockets. "Damn!", she says, "Seeing that reminds me of 'The Color Purple'!".  "Hot Chocolate", Doyouwanna's voice coos at the replicator in her cabin. Her patient, a newly acquired Ensign, sits nervously.  Doyouwanna slides back into her chair, cupping the warmth of her drink. "Now, Ensign Onya, I sense a great need inside you", she begins. The young girl lifts her head. She is shy and quite beautiful. "Oh no, Doyouwanna, there is nothing inside me now. I took it out before our appointment".  Doyouwanna smiles at the girls nievtae. "What I meant was that I get the feeling you desire something you've never had before". The Ensign's eyes immediately break contact from D
Rob Zombie's film career has been defined by horror until this point: House of 1,000 Corpses, the two Halloween films, and his upcoming The Lords of Salem are explicitly horror, and The Devil's Rejects is such grimy exploitation that it has to be viewed as horror at its core. We've known he might move away from the genre at some point, and that time may be now. And why should guys like Kevin Smith be the only ones to make hockey movies?  Zombie is attached to write, produce and direct Broad Street Bullies, a film based on the career of the upstart and ultimately winning '70s Philadelphia Flyers hockey team. But don't worry about some of Zombie's trademarks; as a '70s hockey film, and specifically one about the 'take no prisoners' Flyers, there's a lot of room for violence here.  Deadline says the film came about thanks to Zombie picking up the film rights to the team, and the Flyers are reportedly fully behind the project. For what he's aiming to make, think "Rocky meets Boogie Nights on ice," and he explains,  Each character involved is more outrageous than the next. The backdrop of the turbulent year of 1974 is perfect for this 'stranger than fiction' sports tale.  The idea is to shoot the film "shortly," and more than anything else, the idea of Zombie making a movie with a happy ending — the Flyers won the Stanley Cup in '74 — is seriously strange.  Here's the 2010 HBO documentary Broad Street Bullies, which chronicles the team in less fictionalized fashion than Zombie is likely to make.  By the way, the trailer for The Lords of Salem has been shown at Zombie's live show during this summer, but there isn't an official online release at this point.
On Sunday, when Manchester United take on Swansea City, a 58-year-old man by the name of Pete Molyneux will lift up an old bed-sheet just as he did, infamously, in December 1989 when Alex Ferguson's back was pressed against a cold, unforgiving wall and the mood inside Old Trafford was of brooding discontent.  The message back then was short and to the point. "Three years of excuses and we're still crap, ta-ra Fergie," the banner read. It has gone down in history, the nadir of Ferguson's reign, and now the man with the paintbrush and the tin of black emulsion plans to makes an updated version. This time it will come, in part, as an apology. Mostly, it will come as a thank you.  Pete, like a lot of United supporters, expects to be holding back the tears during Ferguson's 1,500th – and last – game in charge. His banner will read: "Twenty-three years of silver and we're still top, ta-ra Fergie."  Ta-ra, indeed. Busby closed his reign at Old Trafford when he was 62. Shankly left Liverpool at the age of 60. Paisley lasted at Anfield until he was 64. Clough was 58 when he bowed out. Ferguson is 71, with a pacemaker in his chest and a hip replacement on the calendar, yet the first reaction is still near disbelief and a sense of wonder.  The statue of Sir Alex Ferguson outside Old Trafford. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian  The Man Who Can't Retire, one newspaper used to call him. And there he was, after the latest championship, cracking jokes, full of levity and humour, talking effusively about working next season and beyond. Someone asked whether we should take it for granted he would still be in charge and he talked about the "magic pills" still working. He always was particularly skilled at spinning a line, Fergie.  His legacy is as solid as the stadium where his statue – long overcoat, match-face, strict side-parting (it was always a side-parting, even in the 1970s when football went shaggy) – now rises behind the stand they named after him. Thirteen league titles for United, two European Cups, two Intercontinental World Cups, one European Cup-Winners' Cup, five FA Cups, four League Cups. Does the Community Shield count? There were 10 of them.  Add in those years at Aberdeen, when he set about dismantling the Old Firm's dominance, and the trophy count is 49. Manager of the year? Ten times. Manager of the month? Twenty-seven. It's bordering on ridiculous: has there ever been another manager whose silverware has to be totted up like a maths problem?  Nobody has ever done it with so much competitive courage. Nobody has beaten the system like he has. Ferguson has outlasted 24 different managers at Real Madrid, 19 at Internazionale, 18 at Chelsea and 14 at Manchester City. He has seen off prime ministers Thatcher, Major, Blair and Brown and most of us probably expected Cameron would be added to that list rather than joining in the tributes in the House of Commons.  Ferguson's latest title, United's 20th in total, brings him personally level with Arsenal, the third most successful club in the country. It is not strictly true that he knocked Liverpool off their perch but he has certainly done a fine job of helping to make sure they did not clamber back. Liverpool have won the title 18 times. If Ferguson were a younger man – maybe 10 years or so – you would have fancied him to catch and overhaul them, too.  When Ferguson took over on 6 November 1986 United were 19th in the old First Division and had not won the league for nearly two decades. Fuji had just launched the world's first disposable camera. Mike Tyson was a couple of weeks away from his first world title. Nick Berry was at No1 in the charts with Every Loser Wins. It was the year of Crocodile Dundee and Top Gun, Andrew marrying Sarah, Charlene marrying Scott, "Freddie Starr Ate My Hamster" and Wayne Rooney's first birthday.  Ferguson's team for his first game, at Oxford United, was: Turner, Duxbury, McGrath, Moran, Albiston, Hogg, Blackmore, Moses, Stapleton, Davenport, Barnes. Ferguson, determined to get to his first team-talk right, managed to call Peter Davenport "Nigel" by mistake. They lost 2-0.  Twenty-six years on, we probably have a better idea why he could not bring himself to face the media after that defeat to Real Madrid in the Champions League in March and the shattering effects it must have had on him, knowing
It's been almost 13 years and the nonsense shows no sign of stopping. It is still amazing to me – thousands of direct eyewitnesses saw two passenger jets plow into each of the twin towers. Further, there are countless videos from multiple vantage points clearly showing these events.  Also keep in mind that after the first jet hit the North Tower, media attention descended onto the towers. The media was in full force when the second jet hit the South Tower. In addition, many personal video cameras were up and running. It is therefore an extensively documented event.  In the face of this overwhelming direct eyewitness and corroborating video evidence, who could deny the basic fact that two jets struck those two towers that morning?  Well, this guy, for one. I know this is beating a dead horse, but I think it is useful to have occasional reminders of the extent to which people can deceive themselves into absurd conclusions. It should also be noted that, while apparently declining in more recent polls, belief in a 9-11 conspiracy remains high. Averaging all surveys, less than half of those asked accept the standard explanation that 9-11 was an Al Qaeda plot.  One of the ways in which people arrive at and then reinforce conclusions that are demonstrably absurd is anomaly hunting. This is a common part of the conspiracy theory process – look at any complex event and hunt for any apparent anomaly. Does anything not make immediate sense or stick out as unusual.  This is a form of data-mining – looking at a very large set of data and hunting for patterns or statistical quirks. Any large set of data will contain these things by chance alone. All the details that make up a complex event represent a large data set, and so apparent anomalies and unusual coincidences should be common.  This mental error is then combined with the false conclusion that because there are apparent anomalies, something must be wrong with the superficial or official story. Conspiracy theorists are very impressed when they find anomalies, because they work from the false premise that if there weren't a cover-up, then no such anomalies should be apparent.  Apparent anomalies, however, are everywhere. If you look you will find them.  This latest YouTube video is a perfect example of anomaly hunting. The author, pouring over videos of jets crashing into towers, thinks he has found evidence that the video was faked. He points to the appearance that the wing of the plane seems to pass behind a building in the background. He concludes this is a "layering error" and is therefore evidence the entire video is faked.  There is a far simpler explanation, however. This is simply an optical illusion and an artifact of the video. The shade of the wing is very similar to that of the building in the background, so when the two are overlayed the video camera cannot separate the two. The wing therefore disappears into the building, which our brains then interpret as it being behind the building.  You can see that this is true because on the nearer side of the building, which is more lit by sunlight, the wing is much darker and we can see it pass in front of this side of the building.  The video, therefore, is not evidence of CG. This is just what happens when you zoom in on such video – artifacts appear and can sometimes produce optical illusions.  This, of course, is a much simpler explanation than the claim that thousands of eyewitnesses were somehow deceived, that hundreds of videos were all faked, that the passengers on those jets were made to disappear, the buildings were demolished, and all the other elements of that day were faked without leaving any hard evidence behind. The more you think about the implications of a conspiracy, the more absurd it becomes.  The new video also claims that the jet would not have penetrated the building as it did. This is just naive, and a bit arrogant. Why would anyone presume to know intuitively what should happen when a passenger jet loaded with fuel flies into a building at 466 mph. The kinetics of such an event are totally outside our everyday experience.  The momentum of that jet had to go somewhere, and the exploding fuel would have provided even more energy. Further, the towers were constructed with their supports on the inside, and so the outer shell was more fragile than for most other similar buildings.  This point is not even an anomaly.  The true lesson here is to never underestimate the extent to which people can convince themselves that the absurd is true.
"The Dark Crystal: Age of Resistance" returns to the world of Thra, where three Gelfling discover the horrifying secret behind the Skeksis' power and set out to ignite the fires of rebellion and save their world.
San Diego Harbor Police arrest a man after running across the Lindbergh Field airport runway Image credit: ABC News  A Marine recruit possibly escaping boot camp was arrested after allegedly running across an open runway at busy San Diego International, stealing a van, then colliding with a tow vehicle.  Just after 6 a.m. on Thursday, Harbor Police in San Diego received a call from Lindbergh Field Airport with reports of a fence alarm sounding off. Then a second report was made of what appeared to be "a Marine recruit running across the airfield toward the terminals," said Harbor PD Lt. John Forsythe.  The airport is located next to the San Diego Marine Corps Depot near downtown. Two barbed-wire fences separate the depot from the airport's runways.  Police say the man was seen running across a runway toward gate six in the Southwest terminal.  Police went to the runway and found the man hiding inside a janitorial van that he had backed up, resulting in a collision with a Southwest airline tug-a small cart used to transport luggage. Police surrounded the van, ordered him out and handcuffed the marine. Cuts were found on the man's arms from jumping the barbed-wire fence.  ABC News affiliate 10 News-KGTV said the suspect was taken to the Naval Medical Center San Diego, where he underwent medical and psychological evaluations.  Police confirmed the man is a 22-year-old Marine Corps recruit from San Rafael, Calif. The recruit's name was not released.  Police said they will charge the man with stealing a vehicle and trespassing onto the airfield. He is in the custody of the Marine Corps Police Department.  "The recruit reported to MCRD on Monday, January 14 and was going through initial processing," the San Diego Marine Recruit Depot said in a statement. "He had not begun recruit training."  Forsythe believes the Marine recruit was trying to escape boot camp, saying "some recruits don't prepare for what they'll experience in boot camp."  Forsythe says he's worked with Harbor police for 25 years and had seen recruits jumping the fence more often in the 1980's and '90s but said, "now a recruit jumping over the fence is a very rare occasion."
I finally did it! I got the 600 lb deadlift. It took me six years to move from 550 lbs to 600 lbs, but I got there. For the past several months, I've been training my butt off (or better yet, on).  First Meet Results (Last Year)  HERE is a link to my first PL meet one year ago where I attained a 375 lb squat, a 287 lb bench press, a 562 lb deadlift, and a 1,223 lb total at a bodyweight of 220 lbs. This article also details my experiences as a first time competitor. My goal at last year's meet was to pull off a 400 lb squat, 300 lb bench press, 600 lb deadlift, and 1,300 lb total, but I wasn't quite there yet. I needed another year to make this come to fruition.  Second Meet Results (Yesterday)  Yesterday, I weighed in at 236 lbs and attained a 413 lb squat, a 314 lb bench press, a 601 lb deadlift, and a 1,328 lb total. I gained 16 lbs and added 38 lbs to my squat, 27 lbs to my bench press, 39 lbs to my deadlift, and 106 lbs to my total. I PR'd on all three lifts for the day.  Raw Powerlifting  I prefer raw powerlifting over geared powerlifting, however, one day I'd like to train for a geared meet as I think it would be fun and it would allow me to better understand the differences. I've messed around with knee wraps and squat briefs and they added around 60 lbs to my squat on the first attempt, so I wonder what adding in a squat suit/bench shirt and several months of practice would do for my lifts. Both meets I've done so far were with the 100% Raw Federation – they do an outstanding job. If you're thinking about competing, click on the schedule tab and plan a meet, you will be very happy with your decision.  I want to help promote the sport of raw powerlifting. That was the point of the Operation Get Strong and Sexy series – to show women that powerlifting doesn't automatically bulk you up and to help encourage women to compete. I will tell you that the camaraderie is amazing at these events – everyone is so helpful, friendly, and supportive. It's invigorating.  What excited me almost as much as attaining my deadlift goal was the feedback I received at the meet. I was approached by approximately 6 different lifters whom each informed me that my articles have been extremely helpful to them. Two of these individuals are top lifters in Arizona, with legs the size of tree trunks. One said that the hip thrust has helped his squat and improved his pelvic tilt. The other said that the hip thrust has helped his deadlift lockout. Two of the people found me through TNation, which reminds me that I need to write an article for them ASAP – I've ben slacking! Two women approached me and told me that I was the reason they entered the contest. Another woman told me that she uses my methods with all of her clients (she's a trainer) and told me that the results have been incredible. Hearing this feedback makes it all worth it!  Upcoming Strength Goals  My goal for the next year is to duplicate yesterday's performance at a bodyweight of 220 lbs. Then I wish to total 1,400 lbs.  It's not easy to be setting PR's at the age of 37, after 22 years of lifting, so patience and good training are the keys. Not just hard training – smart AND hard training. Training hard without also training smart usually leads to injury and stagnation.  Video of the Meet  Below is a video of the meet, with my commentary:  Reflections  Squats and bench went very well. I don't think I could have mustered up another 5 lbs on either lift, so it's great to feel like you didn't leave any room in the tank. I thought I'd get my 3rd deadlift attempt at 612 lbs, since 601 lbs came up fairly easily, but I suppose I was a bit fatigued. I would have went 9/9 if I'd have gotten it, which would have been astounding. Oh well, I'll hit it down the road.  I can't decide which deadlift stance I like most; my lockout is strongest with conventional, I'm strongest off the floor with sumo, and semi-sumo seems to be a good compromise. When you're 6'4″ tall, squats and bench sure feel better with some extra body mass. I remember talking to Dave Tate 6 years ago and he told me that I'd need to weigh 300-320 lbs to be a competitive world class powerlifter at my height – I agree with him.  I prefer to weigh around 225 lbs, and I don't see myself gaining another 100 lbs any time soon,
John Watson Book Reviews (103) John Watson Book Review #103 - Challenging Conventional Wisdom IM John Watson - Monday 28th January 2013  Move First Think Later. | http://www.theweekinchess.com John Watson reviews and discusses one of the most controversial and provocative instructional books in many years "Move First, Think Later" by Willy Hendriks. I (Mark Crowther) think the book is wonderful and have learned a lot from it. I'm not sure I agree it is for players of all strengths, I think a certain amount of ability is needed to get something out of it. As someone who has struggled with quite a lot of instructional literature over the years this book is a great tonic. I've found strong practical puzzle books as the only thing I've truly got on with. This book has given me many ideas on what to try next. I was pleased to read in the book there is a nice idea on how to use the TWIC games section by choosing random games and positions to produce an almost unlimited amount of exercise material. See John Watson's detailed review below.  John Watson Book Review #103 - Challenging Conventional Wisdom  Move First, Think Later; Willy Hendriks; 256 pages; New in Chess 2012  Introduction  I've been asked about Willy Hendriks' Move First, Think Later enough times (by people who loved or disliked it) that I thought I'd contribute my own two cents worth. This review turned into something frighteningly long, but that's in large part due to the fact that I have reproduced Hendriks' examples and prose at considerable length to give you a direct taste of the material.  First, let me attempt a general description of the book, which, incidentally, won the English Chess Federation's 2012 Book of the Year award. In Move First, Think Later (subtitled ' Sense and Nonsense in Improving Your Chess'), Hendriks tries to demolish a number of myths (in his view) about how to improve one's chess, as well as to investigate how the mind of a chessplayer works and what insights can be derived therefrom. In doing so, he refers to the cognitive sciences ("cognitive psychology, artificial intelligence, neurology, neurobiology, philosophy and others"), which he says have made "considerable progress." To quote from the Introduction: "From general concepts and theories we are moving towards knowledge on a more empirical and microscopic level, to summarise it briefly and (too) simply. Some of the old questions and new insights of the cognitive sciences form the source of inspiration for this book. Are they of any use for the player trying to improve his chess? Do they shed new light on our different training methods? Or even suggest new and different forms of training?" But what most people will remember from this book, and will likely be either amused or alarmed by, is Hendriks' acidic criticism of famous chess authors and of conventional chess wisdom. Much more on that below.  The book consists of 27 chapters, most of which are essentially essays covering a wide array of subjects. It has quite a few exercises, presented at the beginning of each chapter and then discussed within the chapter, which I think is an attractive and useful method of getting your points across. Hendriks' says, with his usual sense of humour: "If you do the exercises, you will learn the most from this book. Some may say: 'You will learn at least something.' "  The range of topics is impressive - Hendriks likes to jump here and there, touching upon subjects or random thoughts which are only tangentially related to chess. That's fine, even stimulating, and particularly good for browsing. In part, this flitting about may be due to the fact that some of the chapters were originally articles written for a chess column. Nevertheless, a good portion of the book's contents are related to a major unifying idea. That is expressed in various ways in various chapters, but to a large extent comes down to the idea that moves themselves are more important than verbal concepts in chess, and that methods for improvement that go from the general to the particular are flawed. He has several ways of saying this, e.g., "You learn to play good chess by taking in good chess. There is no way to outsmart a diligent student with some clever way of thinking. There is no short-cut route to the best move by some revolutionary way of looking at the position. The strongest players are not following secret protocols."  Hendriks Video Lecture from London Classic  Another version of this can be seen in a lecture by Hendriks at the London Chess Classic, which you can see on YouTube (http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=7CWvB5pz79k).  Improve without using language?  In it he says "In my book I have the suggestion that maybe it's possible to improve your chess
I had been meaning to read Pride of Baghdad for a long time now, but had never gotten around to it (things kept getting in the way...), but I was pleasantly surprised to get it; I love BKV-he's one of the best writers I can think of, comic or otherwise. As well, I had never read Anya's Ghost, but it was one of those books that looked good but never entirely caught my interest. I'm always on the lookout for new comics to read, and slice-of-life books are always a welcome treat. Thanks!
The IWW  The Industrial Workers of the World, commonly known as the IWW, are one of the most historic radical labor unions in the United States and around the world. Famous for their utilization of the "wildcat" tactic, the IWW has been instrumental in securing basic labor freedoms for workers around the world. They are still active in fighting for workers in every industry, and have contributed to significant recent labor successes, such as the historic West Virginia teacher's strike in 2018.  Learn More
Legal stuff: the Mass Effect universe and the Warhammer 40000 universe are property of the corporation Bioware and Games Workshop respectively; neither of them are my creation.  All original characters are my property, and may be used if I have provided appropriate permission.  Hammerhand  Chapter 1-Evacuation  "Hull integrity at sixty percent."  "Losing life support power."  "Torpedo batteries five through to twenty lost."  The droning of Servitors was barely discernable through the din of klaxons blaring their warnings and the frantic yells of the crew of the Faith's Fury. Brother Captain Malleus cursed as he heard yet another alert of yet more structural damage reports were relayed to him, yet more grim, hopeless new. The Fury was dying, he knew it. It was only a matter of time before the strike cruiser gave out.  In the void, hundreds of kilometres away, the Ork fleet pounded the great bulk of Faith's Fury. Crude lasers cobbled together from scrap pounded the vessel's flanks, torpedoes guided by insane greenskin pilots screaming across the void and into the ship. Cut off from the rest of the Imperial fleet, who were making a spirited attempt to fight through the xenos blockade, Faith's Fury was alone and defenceless.  "Captain!" Hullen's voice crackled into the vox bead surgically planted into the Astartes' ear. "We need to go now. Our brothers have been evacuated, and we're in the Thunderhawk waiting for you."  "Then go!" Malleus ordered without a second thought. "Don't wait for me."  "That is not a good idea, Captain," Cyralius replied, jumping into the vox channel. "If we wish to defeat the greenskins then your tactical expertise will be needed. The Fury is done for; do not be a fool. Staying here and dying will achieve nothing."  Malleus sighed, before nodding.  "Once again you provide the voice of reason, Cyralius," he said. "I'm coming down."  "Be quick, Malleus."  "Captain!" Malleus called over the din, and the command throne at the centre of the bridge swivelled to face the Astartes. The thin, bionically enhanced figure within it called across; "What is it, Malleus?"  "I'm leaving the ship, Kurias," Malleus replied. "Give the orders to evacuate the officers and come with me."  "Aye sir," Kurias replied, before barking a set of orders into a vox mounted into the throne. Kurias was one of the best ship pilots the Sons of Thunder had; he would be needed as much as Malleus in the fight to come. There was a whine as various neural plugs retracted from his body, before he dragged himself free of the throne, pushing through the crowded bridge towards Malleus. The Astartes clamped his helmet into place before grabbing a rebreather unit and slinging it to Kurias.  "No telling where there'll be vacuum," he said. "Now we must hurry."  The hulking space marine hurried through the bridge, Kurias in his wake, and through one of the heavy blast doors that sealed it off from the rest of the ship.  In the corridors, the chaos was even more intense, panicked armsmen sprinting through the corridors. There was shouting, the screams of the injured and dying and the desperate prayers of those invoking the Emperor to save them in their hour of need. While Malleus could simply shoulder his way through the chaos, his immense bulk lending him the brawn needed, Kurias was struggling to keep up; even with his bionics, the captain spent a long time in his command throne and was struggling to walk, let alone get through the mad scrum of panicked people, servitors, crimson alert lights and blaring claxons.  Realising that Kurias was struggling to keep up, Malleus turned and grabbed the captain, before hoisting him onto his shoulders, ignoring the man's surprised protests as he continued his same, relentless pace.  "Captain, where are you?" Hullen asked. "We can't wait much longer."  "I'm on my way!" Malleus replied. "Hold on!"  Taking a deep breath, the Astartes began to run. The crowds scattered before him in terror of being crushed as he stampeded forwards, smashing aside servitors too slow to get into his way. He thundered down stairs, drawing his thunder hammer one handed to break down a bulkhead barring his way. Within minutes, he had reached the hangar, in which the reassuringly familiar white and gold bulk of his personal thunderhawk, Emperor's Flame, was
ORLANDO, Fla. – Orlando City SC are close to revealing the location of their new USL team after narrowing their selection process down to a handful of sites.  It's the latest step as the Lions ramp up their plans for their own USL franchise, which was announced at the end of June. The team also announced the return of longtime stalwart Rob Valentino as assistant coach of the new team, whose name will also be revealed in the near future.  The possibility of adding a women's team under the Orlando City brand is also under consideration as the team looks to expand its footprint in Central Florida.  Currently, the choice of location remains in the Greater Orlando metro area. Recent reports have indicated the city of DeLand (40 miles to the north) and Melbourne (70 miles east) are among the front-runners, but other possibilities remain.  Both DeLand and Melbourne would fit the club's target model of being in City's overall catchment area while adding to their fan base. Both teams would also be able to train together at the Lions' extensive practice facility in nearby Seminole County.  On the coaching side, Valentino – who anchored the team's back four during Orlando's time in USL PRO from 2011-14 – will return from a year with USL's Arizona United to assist Anthony Pulis, son of West Bromwich Albion head coach Tony Pulis.  Pulis, 31, is thrilled to have the chance to parlay a well-traveled playing career into a chance to coach at the senior level straight away, and he is raring to go.  "These next two months will be the most challenging," he said. "I am looking forward to everything involved but I will be really keen to get to the preseason and do what I feel I can do best, which is getting out there and coaching a team.  "I am currently spending hours going through video of various players. Ever since the team was announced, I've been getting recommendations from agents all over the world. Initially I get an idea of what these players can do and then I need to see if they fit our requirements. If they do tick the right boxes, I look at it further, going into their background and seeing if they might have the kind of character and team-bonding spirit we're also looking for, as I know from my own USL experience how important that is."  Pulis will have carte blanche to bring in a number of new faces, as well as taking some of the team's younger MLS players who are only on the fringe of the first XI, plus a handful of Academy players.  "We should have several Academy graduates in our group," Pulis confirmed. "We are not as far along as some MLS teams like LA, Seattle and Portland in Academy terms, but I have spent a good bit of time with all age levels this year and have a good idea of the talent at hand.  "I have told the U-18s I will be watching a good few of them in training, and, if they look like they can perform at the next level, I will have no qualms whatsoever about bringing them up. You don't want to put any extra pressure on them just now, but there is definitely going to be an opportunity for some of them."  Pulis will also have no hesitation in tapping into an extra source of inside knowledge at regular intervals as he takes his first full coaching steps after a 13-year playing career in England and the US.  "Yes, I talk to dad on the phone a lot," he admitted. "I would be foolish not to draw on that level of knowledge, get ideas from him and bounce ideas off him. The same is true of having Adrian [Heath] here, so I have two experienced coaches close at hand.  "I am very lucky that Orlando has exposed me to everything at the club and allowed me to learn from it. I finished playing last year and have been helping out at training sessions with everyone from the U-12s to the first team. I just can't wait to get going now."
Summary  THE EDUCATIONAL ALTERNATOR ☼ Check out the video I have done showing the Alternator being taken apart and re-assembled below! ☼ YouTube - 3D Printed Educational Alternator This 1:1 scale alternator features over 30 pages in the lesson to help you teach your students or to follow along to teach yourself. The lesson covers all aspects both internally and externally on the Alternator. You'll have a complete understanding on how they work. You can test yourself with the included Quiz and, the documentation covers 3D printing and assembling your very own Alternator Model. Featured Designs of the week - Pinshape - December 1, 2017  Featured on Thingiverse - December 3, 2017  Article featuring the Alternator Project on 3DPrint.com - December 8, 2017 (https://3dprint.com/196533/chris-halliday-automotive-parts/)  How I Designed This  The complete Brake Caliper project was designed in Autodesk Fusion 360 Tolerances are important when 3D Printing. The tough part is ensuring your print will work with everyone's desktop 3D printer. This can be quite a challenge. With the Educational Alternator, the fit of most pieces of the caliper were set with ~.5-.7mm tolerances in SLS Technology. My initial planning of the Alternator was to have the ability to pull the alternator part, pull the pieces off and re-assemble so you can see the inner workings and all of the components of an Alternator.  Standards  Overview and Background  Are you curious how an automotive alternator works? Do you know that most vehicles on the road today have an alternator that is used to charge your vehicle's battery allowing you to run your headlights, stereo and even to charge your cell phone. Alternators play a crucial role in your vehicle and I have set out and put together this comprehensive lesson to help educate our youth and anyone else curious about vehicles.  While it is great to read and learn about alternators, there is really no substitution for holding a physical part in hand and having something to look at up close. Along with the extensive lesson included, I've gone into great detail about the 3D printing aspect of the Alternator and walk you through the process of making your own alternator. This will make it a great project for your class to participate in.  The Alternator is suitable for FDM, SLA & SLS printing and has been made to fit together very well. I have included Rotor-Hollow.STL and Stator-Hollow.STL for use in SLA & SLS printing technologies. The lesson includes pertinent information relating to settings needed while 3D Printing. I'd like to thank everyone for checking out my project and I am always thrilled to hear about my projects helping to teach kids and adults all over the globe. 3D Printing is a powerful technology and education is important for our youth. Lets make learning fun! ☺  Lesson Plan and Activity  You'll find a complete document attached to this model titled, "3D Learn About - Alternator.PDF". In this document, we will cover all aspects of an alternator from the inside out. Here are just a few of the topics covered in the included document:  Alternating Current to Direct Current  3-Phase Winding's  Bearings  Magnets  This automotive alternator is built to scale with only a few minor modifications to allow it to be 3D printed in the classroom. It is a Bosch alternator from a Chevrolet truck and uses only 3 bolts to help fasten it together, the rest of the alternator is completely 3D printed.  Materials Needed  (3) - M5x75mm/3" bolts  (3) - M5 Nuts  Skills Learned  automotive  electromagnets  vehicle  generators  alternators  alternating current  direct current  electronics  voltage  power  Duration of Lesson  1-2 Hours  Alternator Video  Learn about the 3D Printed Alternator
HANG TIME, TEXAS – Some things are just natural. Painters paint, writers write, singers sing, coaches coach.  Jerry Sloan is a coach.  So how much longer will be it before the 69-year-old Hall of Famer and former fixture with the Jazz is back on an NBA sideline?  According to Sam Amick of SI.com, maybe sooner than you think.  "I think if the right situation came along, whatever that is," he said before pausing to ponder. "I don't know what the right situation is. We'll have to wait and see, I guess." He'll be waiting for the phone to ring again at his home in Utah, where he became the NBA's third-most winningest coach of all time (1,221-803) before abruptly stepping down last February. After 23 seasons, the job became too taxing for the longest tenured coach in league history.  Back when he first walked away from the Jazz, Sloan wasn't mentally and physically ready to jump right back in and set up camp on another sideline. But anyone who has ever spent time around him could hardly see Sloan permanently adopting the lifestyle of the gentleman farmer back on his spread in McLeansboro, Ill.   "Before, I was just visiting with people [from teams], but they knew that I wasn't ready to coach … back in the summer," said Sloan, who returned to his house in Utah in recent months. "I didn't know if anybody was going to call [after that]. Maybe they won't. I don't know what my reaction would be. I had some people call when they'd lost their coaches. I was honest with them."  But the honest truth has changed since then. And considering energy has played such a significant part in Sloan's decision-making, he's sounding as if a return could be in the cards.  "My energy level has changed a great deal since I quit coaching," said Sloan, who is an avid walker. "It's changed a lot now. I've had time to work out. I feel better. "I had a chance to relax, to do something that I haven't had the time to do in 30 years. That's rewarding. You have time to spend with the family and have Thanksgiving and things like that. I enjoyed all of that. But [returning to coaching] is a decision where, if somebody talked to me, I'd review the situation like anybody else and take it from there."  It's downright shocking that the Kings didn't at least feel him out when they let Paul Westphal go last week. But it certainly won't the last opportunity to open up this season.  Despite assurances from the front office, how much longer can the winless Wizards stand behind Flip Saunders? And just for fun, how fast might Deron Williams' head hit the ceiling if somebody told him the Nets were just thinking about hiring Sloan as an answer to their 2-8 start?  Category: Uncategorized / Tags: , Deron Williams, Flip Saunders, Fran Blinebury, Jerry Sloan, Paul Westphal, Sam Amick / 17 Comments on Is Jerry Sloan Itching To Return? /
This has become the new cliché for yuppie types or any pseudo-intellectual types or just idiots that think it sounds special. It is simply just another way of saying: contact, call, speak to, notify, etc. It really sounds faggy and flags the speaker as being self conscious about how they sound to their peers. You also have to wonder who they think they're impressing when they speak like they have an Emily Post book on etiquette shoved up their ass.
Club Atlético de Madrid returned within a point of leaders FC Barcelona in the Spanish Liga as they made it 11 wins from 12 league outings via a straightforward 2-0 success against Athletic Club at the Estadio Vicente Calderón.  Diego Simeone's men went ahead after 32 minutes as David Villa's volley from ten metres slipped past Gorka Iraizoz and into the net. The lead was doubled nine minutes later when Diego Costa latched onto Koke's pass, cut inside Erik Morán – who was later sent off – and slipped in his 13th league goal of the season. That put the hosts back on the tails of Barcelona, who defeated RCD Espanyol 1-0 on Friday.  Valencia CF moved ninth courtesy of a 1-0 win at Getafe CF, sealed for them by Dorlan Pabón's remarkable strike from 30 metres, which flew into the top corner after Paco Alcácer had earlier struck the woodwork for the visitors.  Also on Sunday, Levante UD missed the chance to move level with fourth-placed Villarreal CF on 20 points as Piti's added-time goal condemned them to a 1-0 home defeat by Granada CF. As for Málaga CF, they were handed a last-gasp victory as Samu's 93rd-minute winner sealed a 3-2 win against Real Betis Balompié, who had twice pegged back the hosts before the late decider.
Community Rating:  Community Rating: 2.117 / 5 ( 60 votes ) Click here to view ratings and comments.  Oracle Printed Card Name: Flameborn Viron Mana Cost: Converted Mana Cost: 6 Types: Creature — Insect Flavor Text: "Large or small, all will toil for the Great Work." —Decree of Urabrask Watermark: Phyrexian P/T: 6 / 4 Expansion: New Phyrexia Rarity: Common Card Number: 83 Artist: Svetlin Velinov
The Nobel Prize committee has received a petition that endorses awarding the peace prize to US Army Private Bradley Manning, who is convicted of espionage and facing up to 90 years behind bars for leaking classified information to WikiLeaks.  US anti-war activist Normon Soloman, one of the organizers of the petition, gave the 5,000-page document to Nobel committee member Asle Toje on Monday.  However, Toje said the annually awarded US$1 million prize is "not a popularity contest," adding that such campaigns do not influence the Nobel Committee in its choice.  "Remaining in prison and facing relentless prosecution by the US government, no one is more in need of the Nobel Peace Prize," states the petition, which garnered more than 100,000 signatures.  "No individual has done more to push back against what Martin Luther King Jr. called 'the madness of militarism' than Bradley Manning," the petition reads.  US Army whistleblower Bradley Manning, 25, was found guilty on 20 of his 22 charges for sharing thousands of classified US documents with the anti-secrecy website WikiLeaks in late 2009 and early 2010. Among other charges, he was found guilty of espionage, theft, and embezzlement of government property.  According to Solomon, awarding the soldier the Nobel Prize would underline the important role of whistleblowers in promoting peace and democracy.  "Unless we can speak the truth, then peace-making becomes a hollow exercise of rhetoric rather than reality," Solomon told reporters before submitting the petition.  Former Nobel Peace Prize winner Mairead Corrigan-Maguire formally nominated Manning in June, saying, "I can think of no one more deserving."  She believes that his leaks "helped end the Iraq War" by hastening foreign troop withdrawals and "may have helped prevent further conflicts elsewhere."  Solomon has also stated that Manning's revelations on America's views of the Iraq War "stiffened the resolve of Iraq's government to seek jurisdiction over American troops for criminal actions."  In his article published by USA Today on July 30, Solomon wrote that "It's easy to insist that Bradley Manning must face the consequences of his actions. But we badly need whistleblowers like Manning because US government leaders do not face the consequences of their actions, including perpetual warfare abroad and assaults on civil liberties at home. No government should have the power to keep waging war while using secrecy to cloak policies that cannot stand the light of day."  The Nobel Peace Prize winner will be announced on October 11, 2013 in Oslo.
Photo  Cairo  SOMEDAY I'd love to create a journalism course based on covering the uprising in Egypt , now approaching its first anniversary. Lesson No. 1 would be the following: Whenever you see elephants flying, shut up and take notes. The Egyptian uprising is the equivalent of elephants flying. No one predicted it, and no one had seen this before. If you didn't see it coming, what makes you think you know where it's going? That's why the smartest thing now is to just shut up and take notes.  If you do, the first thing you'll write is that the Islamist parties — the Muslim Brotherhood and the Salafist Al Nour Party — just crushed the secular liberals, who actually sparked the rebellion here, in the free Egyptian parliamentary elections, winning some 65 percent of the seats. To not be worried about the theocratic, antipluralistic, anti-women's-rights, xenophobic strands in these Islamist parties is to be recklessly naïve. But to assume that the Islamists will not be impacted, or moderated, by the responsibilities of power, by the contending new power centers here and by the priority of the public for jobs and clean government is to miss the dynamism of Egyptian politics today.  Come with me to Cairo's dirt-poor Shubra el-Khema neighborhood and the dilapidated Omar Abdel Aziz School, where I watched the last round of voting on Wednesday at a women-only voting center. We were guided by Amr Hassan, a 22-year-old commerce student from the 'hood — a secular youth, who fought to topple the Hosni Mubarak regime in Tahrir Square last year.  Here is what was so striking: virtually all the women we interviewed after the voting — all of whom were veiled, some with only slits for their eyes — said that they had voted for either the Muslim Brotherhood or the Salafists. But almost none said they had voted that way for religious reasons.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Many said they voted for Islamists because they were neighbors, people they knew, while secular liberal candidates had never once visited. Some illiterate elderly women confided that they could not read the ballot and just voted where their kids told them to. But practically all of them said they had voted for the Muslim Brotherhood or Salafist candidates because they expected them to deliver better, more honest government — not more mosques or liquor bans.  Photo  Here are some quotes from Egyptian women on why they voted Islamist: "I love the Muslim Brotherhood; they are the only honest ones. ... I want good education and clean air to breathe. ... We need proper medical care. ... I want my kids to be properly educated. They can't find any jobs. ... The Muslim Brotherhood is not just an Islamist party. It is going to help solve all the problems of the country. ... We have to get the youth working and to raise salaries. Education here is only getting worse. ... My biggest fear is lack of security. We sit in our homes — afraid. You are afraid your son won't be able to go back and forth to school without being kidnapped."
Think Progress has really been all over the Florida voter purge story, finally driving the kind of attention to the issue that it deserves. It's really a case of a political party trying to steal an election in plain sight. When you see the head of the Florida Republican Party admit on national television that the purge is based on flawed data, but also that it must continue, you know that the ulterior motives are clear.  As mentioned, Think Progress' coverage has led to news outlets finally paying attention to what's happening in Florida, including Ari Berman at Rolling Stone. And at least one elections supervisor, in Palm Beach County, has rejected the voter purge list citing the high error rates associates with their generation, and will not be sending out notices to voters that their rights can be taken away if they don't prove their citizenship within 30 days. According to the supervisor, the purge lists are "not credible."  Amidst all this, voting rights activists surveying the scene in Florida got some additional good news. A federal judge today blocked a separate Florida voter suppression law, which is designed to make voter registration drives more difficult.  A federal judge blocked enforcement of key provisions of a restrictive voting law in Florida today, a breakthrough victory for Florida voters and voting rights advocates nationwide. The law, H.B. 1355, included onerous restrictions on community-based voter registration drives, forcing the League of Women Voters of Florida and other groups to shut down their drives. In his decision, U.S. District Judge Robert Hinkle found that the Constitution and federal law prohibit most of Florida's recently-passed restrictions, and highlighted the law's impact on the Plaintiffs' constitutional rights. "Together speech and voting are constitutional rights of special significance; they are the rights most protective of all others, joined in this respect by the ability to vindicate one's rights in a federal court. … [W]hen a plaintiff loses an opportunity to register a voter, the opportunity is gone forever," U.S. Judge Robert L. Hinkle wrote in his opinion blocking most of the Florida law. "And allowing responsible organizations to conduct voter-registration drives—thus making it easier for citizens to register and vote—promotes democracy."  Florida passed the law in order to crack down on voter fraud, a virtually non-existent practice.  This ruling will have no bearing on the voter purge, though it does show the lengths to which Rick Scott and Florida Republicans are willing to go to guarantee an election for their side. As for the voter purge, activists will continue to track the efforts throughout the state.
Scribd We may finally have the smoking gun in the patent case between Apple and Samsung.  Apple successfully entered a massive 132-page internal Samsung report into evidence on Tuesday, which shows how engineers at Samsung methodically analyzed more than 100 features of the iPhone's user interface to see how its own phones compared.  These features range from everything like the browsing experience to the lay out of numbers on the keypad.  The engineers who put together the report repeatedly suggest Samsung tweak the features to be more like the iPhone.  We got the report from All Things D, and we've picked out the most interesting examples of Samsung leaning on Apple design work to improve its own phone.
Description  Feel the disturbance in the Force in Star Wars™ Pinball: Balance of the Force, featuring three brand new original pinball tables immersing fans in the most iconic moments of the Star Wars™ universe.   Experience the power of the Dark Side with a special Darth Vader tribute table. Join Luke Skywalker, Han Solo, Chewbacca and Princess Leia in the fight against the Sith as you play through the most memorable moments of Star Wars: Episode VI Return of the Jedi. Finally, choose to support the Rebel Alliance Fleet or the Galactic Empire's Armada as you take your place in the space battle and complete missions to establish your position as an elite force in the Starfighter fleet.   Online features require an account and are subject to terms of service and applicable privacy policy (playstationnetwork.com/terms-of-service & playstationnetwork.com/privacy-policy).   1-4 players  270MB minimum save size  DUALSHOCK®4  Online Play (Optional)   Software subject to license (us.playstation.com/softwarelicense). Online features require an account and are subject to terms of service and applicable privacy policy (playstationnetwork.com/terms-of-service & playstationnetwork.com/privacy-policy). One-time license fee for play on account's designated primary PS4™ system and other PS4™ systems when signed in with that account.   STAR WARS and related properties are trademarks in the United States and/or in other countries of Lucasfilm Ltd. and/or its affiliates. © 2013-2017 Lucasfilm Ltd. All rights reserved   Game Code © 2017 Zen Studios Ltd. All rights reserved
Chinese Breeze is an innovative graded Chinese reader series that is planning to offer over 60 titles of graded Chinese readers at eight language levels. Chinese Breeze is designed for all learners of Chinese from beginner to advanced levels. Chinese Breeze offers students a great opportunity to read for pleasure and develop fluency, improve their confidence in Chinese. Chinese Breeze is published by the Peking University Press, a Chinese publishing house who specialise in materials for learners of Chinese.  The text in the Chinese Breeze series has been carefully selected so that it contains the most useful words for actual communication in Chinese. All books in Chinese Breeze are carefully tailored to the targetted readers as they have been written with help of special Chinese as a foreign language teachers.  The stories in Chinese Breeze are mostly original stories and cover a large variety of genres including adventure, romance, fantasy, social issues and many others.  Each book in the Chinese Breeze series comes with a mini CD with recordings of the text. This mini CD can be played in a normal CD player and has the text in both a normal speed and a slower speed as well. In 2013 so far two books have been published, The Painted Skin and the The Moon Sculpture Left Behind.  Books in Chinese Breeze:  Level 1 (approx 300 word level)  Can I Dance With You?  Left and Right: The Conjoined Brothers  I Really Want to Find Her  Two Children Seeking the Joy Bridge  Whom Do You Like More?  Wrong, Wrong, Wrong!  Level 2 (approx 500 word level)  Secrets of a Computer Company  Green Phoenix  Mother and Son  After the Accident  Our Geese Have Gone  If I Didn't Have You  An Old Painting  Level 3 (approx 750 word level)  The Painted Skin  The Moon Sculpture Left Behind  The Third Eye  Buy a complete set of Chinese Breeze here.
Sen. Jeff Sessions of Alabama, a Republican member of the Senate Judiciary Committee, warned in a speech to the Faith and Freedom Coalition's Road to Majority conference today that "the courts are at risk" in the upcoming presidential election, lamenting that at least one current Supreme Court justice displays a "secular mindset."  Sessions said that as the committee's ranking member during the confirmation hearings of Justices Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan, "I felt, like so many of you, the court hasn't been performing in a way we like it to."  He repeated a criticism of Sotomayor that conservatives had leveled at her during her confirmation hearings, expressing dismay that she had approvingly quoted legal scholar Martha Minow's observation that in the law "there is no objective stance but only a series of perspectives — no neutrality, no escape from choice in judging," an acknowledgment of the hidden assumptions and biases that all judges bring to the law.  Sessions said the quote "still makes the hair stand up on the back of my neck."  "You see, this is a postmodern, relativistic, secular mindset and I believe it's directly contrary to the founding of our republic," he said.  "So I really think this whole court system is really important," he added later in the speech, "and the real value and battle that we're engaged in here is one to reaffirm that there is objective truth, it's not all relative. And that means some things are right and some things are wrong, and we're getting too far away from that in my opinion and it's not healthy for any country and it's really not healthy for a democracy like ours that's built on the rule of law."
The Phillies on Tuesday announced a number of hires and promotions within the organization, per Matt Gelb of the Philadelphia Inquirer.  Headlining the moves is the new position of coordinator of international scouting. That job goes to Greg McMillin, a former intern with the organization. The international operations department was further bolstered with the addition of Rafael Alvarez as international scout, the promotion of Ray Robles to assistant director of international operations, and the assignment of Elvis Fernandez to manage the team's Dominican Republic academy.  The organization also hired Bryan Minniti, previously assistant general manager of the Arizona Diamondbacks, to be a special assistant to general manager Matt Klentak. Jorge Velandia, promoted from within and reportedly an advocate of drafting Odubel Herrera in the Rule 5, will also serve as a special assistant.  Moreover, the Phils added a mental-skills coach, giving that job to Geoff Miller, who has worked in that realm with the Braves, Nationals and Pirates.  Also announced were minor league managing appointments, including Gregg Legg to Reading. Legg oversaw single-A Clearwater in 2015. And former Phillie Charlie Hayes will be taking a coaching position with the Gulf Coast Phillies.  More scouting, coaching and analyst positions were also announced Tuesday.
Identical 16-year-old twins Taylor and Tricia say they developed matching eating disorders and have each lost 50 lbs. in the last year. According to their dad, the girls – who both say they are anorexic and bulimic – now weigh less than 80 lbs. apiece.   TELL DR. PHIL YOUR STORY: At your final breaking point?  Find local listings   The sisters say they plan, and carry out their bingeing and purging rituals together. And, that they want to maintain equal weights so that neither will be known as the "fatter twin."While speaking with Dr. Phil, both girls tell him they think the other twin looks too thin, but Tricia describes herself as being "about right." When she sees a photo of herself with Taylor, Tricia starts to cry saying, "I didn't know I was that thin."When the girls are shown a photo of themselves at a healthier weight, Taylor responds: "That is a picture when I knew how to eat normal, and constantly didn't hate myself." WATCH: Man Blames Ex-Wife For Twins' Eating Disorders: 'All They Want To Do Is Binge And Throw Up'   Watch the video above to find out what Taylor and Tricia say they miss about their old lives before their shared eating disorder took over. Then tune in to Dr. Phil on Friday for the emotional conclusion as these identical twins decide whether to make a dramatic change and save their own lives.   Parents Say They Fear Identical Twins Only Have Months To Live Because Of Eating Disorder
Which Spanish language paper should I enrol in?  The appropriate entry point for Spanish language papers depends on your current level of Spanish. Each enrolment is ultimately at the discretion of the Spanish Programme, but the following broad guidelines apply.   Students who have never studied Spanish or whose experience of Spanish is minimal and dates from many years ago, or who have only completed one year at high school, should enrol for SPAN131. This paper is designed for complete beginners.   Students who have studied Spanish for two or three years at high school in the relatively recent past, or have completed SPAN131, should enrol for SPAN132.  For students who have completed four to five years at high school, or who have NCEA Level 2 or 3 in Spanish, or an equivalent qualification, SPAN231 or SPAN232 might be the appropriate paper to enrol for. This paper reviews and consolidates the major grammar points from NCEA Levels 2 and 3.   eVision does not understand that students may be eligible for a paper such as SPAN132 or SPAN232 on the basis of their prior learning and current level of Spanish - eVision will only see a student who does not have the prerequisite (SPAN131 and SPAN132 respectively) and will require that you seek "Special permission" to enrol in that paper. "Special permission" is easily acquired - email languages@otago.ac.nz if you have any further queries or need assistance with your enrolment.  To see the programme requirements for a BA in Spanish, BA(Hons) in Spanish and DipLang in Spanish – click here  Papers  *Not offered in 2018  100 Level Papers  200 Level Papers  300 Level Papers  400 Level Papers (Honours)
"Aggravated felony" is a term of art used to describe a category of offenses carrying particularly harsh immigration consequences for noncitizens convicted of such crimes. Regardless of their immigration status, noncitizens who have been convicted of an "aggravated felony" are prohibited from receiving most forms of relief that would spare them from deportation, including asylum, and from being readmitted to the United States at any time in the future.  Despite what the ominous-sounding name may suggest, an "aggravated felony" does not require the crime to be "aggravated" or a "felony" to qualify. Instead, an "aggravated felony" is simply an offense that Congress sees fit to label as such, and today includes many nonviolent and seemingly minor offenses.  This fact sheet provides an overview of "aggravated felonies" under federal immigration law and the immigration consequences of being convicted of an "aggravated felony."  What Makes a Crime an "Aggravated Felony"?  An offense need not be "aggravated" or a "felony" in the place where the crime was committed to be considered an "aggravated felony" for purposes of federal immigration law. Instead, an "aggravated felony" is any crime that Congress decides to label as such. As two prominent immigration judges have noted, numerous "non-violent, fairly trivial misdemeanors are considered aggravated felonies under our immigration laws."  As initially enacted in 1988, the term "aggravated felony" referred only to murder, federal drug trafficking, and illicit trafficking of certain firearms and destructive devices. Congress has since expanded the definition of "aggravated felony" on numerous occasions, but has never removed a crime from the list. Today, the definition of "aggravated felony" covers more than thirty types of offenses, including simple battery, theft, filing a false tax return, and failing to appear in court. Even offenses that sound serious, such as "sexual abuse of a minor," can encompass conduct that most states classify as misdemeanors or do not criminalize at all, such as consensual intercourse between a 21-year-old and a 17-year-old.  What if the Conviction Occurred before the Crime Was Labeled an "Aggravated Felony"?  In most federal courts, a conviction for any offense listed as an "aggravated felony" is grounds for deportation, even if the crime was not considered an "aggravated felony" at the time of conviction. In other words, whenever Congress adds a new offense to the list of "aggravated felonies" in the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA), lawfully present noncitizens who have previously been convicted of such crimes become immediately deportable. As a result, any addition to the list of "aggravated felonies" will automatically apply retroactively to prior convictions.  Are "Aggravated Felonies" the Only Crimes for Which an Immigrant Can Be Deported?  No. An "aggravated felony" is one—but not the only—basis to deport immigrants convicted of a criminal offense. Removal proceedings may also be initiated against immigrants convicted of one or more "crimes involving moral turpitude," a broad category of offenses that includes, but is not limited to, most crimes that qualify as an "aggravated felony." Noncitizens convicted of crimes involving moral turpitude may be subject to deportation, but do not face the additional consequences associated with a conviction for an "aggravated felony." The immigration laws also permit deportation for convictions of various standalone offenses.  Thus, whether a noncitizen is subject to deportation for a crime is not determined by whether the crime is labeled an "aggravated felony." Instead, the primary impact of the "aggravated felony" classification relates to the increased immigration penalties attached to the label, including the inability to apply for most forms of relief from removal.  What are the Potential Consequences of Being Convicted of an "Aggravated Felony"?  Deportation without a Removal Hearing  Certain noncitizens convicted of an "aggravated felony" are provided fewer legal protections than other immigrants. For example, any immigrant convicted of an "aggravated felony" who is not a lawful permanent resident (LPR) may be administratively deported from the United States without a formal hearing before an Immigration Judge. Immigrants placed in such proceedings are not eligible for asylum or any other form of discretionary relief. Immigrants found deportable in this manner may not appeal to the Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) and can be physically removed two weeks after entry of the order.  Mandatory Unreviewable Detention Following Release from Criminal Custody  Federal immigration authorities are required to detain any immigrant convicted of an "aggravated felony" upon his or her release from criminal custody. To obtain bond from an immigration judge, LPRs who are detained following a
Three new studies released this month lent weight behind the increasingly popular idea that funneling money into fossil fuels is not only harmful for the environment, it's also potentially calamitous for the global financial system.  Reports by the U.K. government's Environmental Audit Committee, the European Union Parliament Greens-European Free Alliance Group and Canberra-based think-tank The Australia Institute all touched on what's known as the "carbon bubble." The carbon bubble describes the overvaluation of fossil fuel assets that will have to be left unburned in order to limit Earth's surface temperatures to 2°C above the preindustrial level. To meet this 2 C (3.6 F) goal—a target agreed by governments in lieu of a more concrete plan to avoid dangerous climate change back in 2010—the majority of the current estimated reserves of oil, gas and coal will have to be left untouched to avoid harmful climate change. But instead of taking these climate policies and risks into account, growing numbers of climate campaigners, policy-makers and financial experts say that stock markets have instead inaccurately valued companies with large holdings of fossil fuels by assuming their assets will all be usable, when in fact they could be left stranded and devalued.  "Financial stability could be threatened if shares in fossil fuel companies turn out to be overvalued because the bulk of their oil, coal and gas reserves cannot be burnt without further destabilizing the climate," warned the U.K.'s EAC chair Joan Walley. The European study looked at the estimated risk for E.U. financial institutions face with a carbon bubble, finding that the exposure amounted to over $1.38 trillion. It concludes that "a carbon bubble shock would cause significant losses for E.U. financial institutions," adding that "the losses for all E.U. banks, insurance companies and pension funds combined would be €350-400 billion ($485 billion to $554 billion)." The Australian Institute's report targets investors, particularly decision ]makers at religious funds, universities, public authorities and private foundations because of the supposed additional ethical or responsible investment obligations they may face.  The arguments put forward by these groups, especially in reframing the climate change debate in terms of financial risks, has been gaining ground for some time. Already institutions have taken notice, with the head of the OECD, Angel Gurría, stating that "the looming choice may be either stranding those assets or stranding the planet." More promisingly still, Norway announced in February that it would set up an expert group to debate ending fossil fuel investments into its $840 billion sovereign wealth fund (gleaned from Norway's surplus oil wealth).Norway has already sold out of 27 coal and gold mine over environmental concerns. If Norway does decide to move out of other fossil fuels, it would throw huge weight behind the growing fossil fuel divestment movement.  Yet not everyone is convinced, including those that share environmental concerns. The basic premise of the carbon bubble, that governments ensure that we stay within 2 C (3.6 F) temperature rise, would in turn mean drastically cutting down on our carbon consumption. Economist Richard Tol points to the patchy and failing regulatory policies from the U.S. to the E.U. and China as evidence that the regulation has not gone far enough to make this a reality. Craig Mackenzie, head of sustainability at U.K.-based Scottish Widows Investment Partnership told the Guardian that the idea that fossil fuels pose a huge threat to the global economy is false. Mackenzie says that investors are already aware of the risks to share prices and will react accordingly if climate policies are more aggressively enforced. But, says Mackenzie, the most problematic aspect of the carbon bubble argument is the way it uses scaremongering tactics. "Suggesting that action on climate change might cause economic melt down sounds to me like the kind of thing you might hear from the Tea Party Republicans not from the European green movement."  The more likely scenario, and one that is already playing out as a result of severe and unusual weather events around the world, is that climate change will strand assets in different sectors of the economy—making it a concern for far more than just fossil fuel companies. Ultimately one thing investors and climate campaigners will agree on is the need for clearer climate policies from governments to deal with and mitigate these changes, rather than uncertainty that fuels speculation and inaction.
84. "War" against the Tsimshian. The first strike.  In effect, by the late 1850s, the many northern natives continuously visiting Lekwungen territory for trade constituted a second immigrant colony. This loosely defined second social entity operated under native rather than European rules. Derivative of the H.B.C.'s Victoria presence, most Northern nations had established an outpost here of some nature by 1862. These footholds seem established under the usual native rules for sharing a resource as guests; as, for example, the Tsilhqot'in once visited Bella Coola or Campbell River in great numbers before Europeans even arrived.  In April 1859, an observer counted some 2,235 Northerners at Victoria. Over 1500 of these occupied 111 established dwelling places, an average of 14 people in each. This seems more or less the average throughout B.C., excepting lodges and longhouses. This density explains the rapid spread of any epidemic disease once it had gained access to a house. The Tsimshian, from the Skeena and area on the north Pacific coast, typically were the largest resident northern contingent at Victoria. In 1859, of the visiting natives occupying structures other than tents, almost 700 were Tsimshian. Adding those in tents, this implies a population well over 1000 at Victoria. They were there to do business with the H.B.C., with the growing influx of miners and with other native nations. For example, in April 1862 Tsimshian entrepreneurs brought down several canoes and soon sold out. Tsimshian canoe making resembled a small vehicle manufacturing industry. Even after smallpox, a few came down again in 1863.  In 1859, confirming his true attitude to natives as "savages" and "barbarians," Douglas wrote to Lord Lytton,  (We) have been visited lately by large numbers of savages from the Queen Charlottes and the Northern Coast, 105 large canoes…about 1500 persons including women and children. The presence in the settlement of these barbarians is troublesome and disagreeable though in smaller numbers they might be useful to the white settlers (through cheap labor,) as it is their numbers far exceed the demand.  According to Douglas, then, there were just too many natives for anything but a nuisance; yet, today, apologists for genocide and lawyers for the crown, explicitly and implicitly, suppose there were hardly any Indians at all in British Columbia and vacant space everywhere. On Douglas' clearly expressed view, these "savages" and "barbarians" might have some residual use if their numbers could be reduced. One supposes that, if these same sentiments had been expressed, say in Rwanda, Canadian historians might then accurately identify in them an incipient genocide friendly sentiment if, afterward, tens of thousands suddenly died.  We have no reason to suppose the Northerners' population or its Tsimshian component in 1862 was any less than in 1859. Nor any reason to suppose Douglas had changed his sentiment toward the too- numerous "savages" and "barbarian" Calibans. Indeed, the 1862 population was probably larger. One party alone of 1000 Tsimshian and Heiltsuk arrived in March.510 One observer said, on the Reserve area itself (without counting the Northerners' village north of town or other camps,) there had been 2000 Northerners in 300 huts, tents and lodges. Lodges were artifacts of permanent settlements, rather than mere transitory camps. Hundreds, perhaps thousands, lodged on the outskirts and in town. The Fort Simpson H.B.C. manager specifically noted more Tsimshian females than usual leaving his locality in spring 1862 "…to prostitute themselves in Victoria." An impartial observer nearby provided this gloss on the practice of native prostitution, "These women are never known to seek such degrading intercourse" but they would "permit it" for gain if trained to it by European men. Tsimshian women had many talents, according to Dr. Helmcken, and were prized for their industry. These women undoubtedly brought goods to undercut H.B.C. prices. Without smallpox, persecution, racial prejudice, economic discrimination and residential schools, British Columbia today would feature a large, vibrant, well-capitalized and well- accepted indigenous business community.  In sum, the 1862 Northerners at Victoria may have numbered 3000, compared to perhaps 5000 resident Europeans. The Northerners population probably peaked, as a rule, in late April. The mining population then presented the maximum number of customers. Douglas had no means of governing these separate native communities, except so far as they would tolerate European wishes and be persuaded to some end. It was a population too large to be forced into any behavior pattern against its interests, without violence. It presented a challenge, then, to Douglas' authority and to the European vision right at Victoria. If one wanted to suppress this competing social
US does not have to hand over all its evidence against Dotcom and three colleagues, says appeals court in New Zealand  US prosecutors have won a court case that brings them a step closer in their attempts to have the Megaupload founder and three of his colleagues extradited from New Zealand.  The appeals court in Wellington overturned an earlier ruling that would have allowed Kim Dotcom and the others broad access to evidence in the case against them at the time of their extradition hearing, which is scheduled for August. The four are accused of facilitating massive copyright fraud through the internet filesharing site.  The court ruled that extensive disclosure would bog down the process and that a summary of the US case would suffice.  Dotcom, a German national, says he is innocent and cannot be held responsible for others using the site to illegally download songs and films. Along with him, US prosecutors are seeking the extraditions of Finn Batato, Mathias Ortmann and Bram van der Kolk, each of whom held senior positions at Megaupload before American authorities shut the site down in 2012.  Paul Davison, one of Dotcom's lawyers, said he planned to appeal at New Zealand's supreme court. Dotcom's legal team must first submit an application to the court which will then decide whether an appeal has enough merit to proceed.  In its ruling the appeals court found that full disclosure of evidence was not necessary at the extradition hearing because the hearing was not the venue to determine guilt or innocence. The court pointed out that the legal obligation on the US was simply to prove it had a valid case.  The court also found that extradition treaties are essentially agreements between governments and "even though courts play a vital part in the process, extradition is very much a government to government process".  Davison said it was vital that Dotcom had access to a wide range of documents including those that could be detrimental to the US case. The lawyer said that would help prove there was no merit to the case.  The extradition hearing has already been postponed from March to August owing to the legal wrangling. It could be postponed further should the supreme court decide to hear the next planned appeal.  Dotcom remains on bail pending the hearing. In January, on the anniversary of his arrest, he launched a new filesharing site called Mega.
As longtime readers may have noticed, I have an abiding interest in Neandertals. To help me keep up with the latest scientific insights into these mysterious relatives of ours, I have a Google alert set for "Neandertal" (and the alternate spelling, "Neanderthal"). I'm always excited to see the email notification that a new story about our closest relative is available for my reading pleasure. There's just one problem: nearly half the time, the story isn't about Neandertals at all. Rather the word appears as an invective hurled at whichever politician or other despised figure has attracted the writer's ire.  Neandertals are the Rodney Dangerfields of the human family—they don't get no respect. Despite mounting evidence that our prehistoric cousins hunted with great skill, made beautiful stone tools, showed compassion toward one another and buried their dead, among other advanced behaviors, the word Neandertal remains a widely used pejorative. Disdain toward Neandertals lingers even after the revelation several years ago that most people today carry their DNA, thanks to long-ago hook-ups between Neandertals and anatomically modern Homo sapiens.  Now a stunning new discovery underscores that it is time to welcome Neandertals in from the cold. Researchers have found markings on eagle talons from a well-known Neandertal site in Croatia that indicate Neandertals harvested the claws and wore them as jewelry. Such evidence attests to a capacity for symbolic thought, long considered a hallmark of modern humans. Davorka Radovčić of the Croatian Natural History Museum in Zagreb, David Frayer of the University of Kansas and their colleagues describe the find in a paper published March 11 in PLOS ONE.  This find is not the first to show Neandertals used raptor claws. Researchers have previously described isolated talons from several Neandertal sites in Europe. But the new discovery, from the site of Krapina in northern Croatia, includes eight talons from at least three white-tailed eagles. The cut marks and polished facets on the talons suggest human modification rather than, say, trampling by animals. The researchers suggest that the talons were part of a single piece of jewelry, possibly a necklace, tied together with string or sinew.  What makes this discovery additionally important is that it predates by a long shot the arrival of anatomically modern Homo sapiens in Europe some 45,000 years ago. Many previous finds suggestive of Neandertal symbolism date to the interval during which Neandertals and moderns overlapped in Europe, leaving open the possibility that Neandertals simply copied the newcomers or that modern items got mixed in with Neandertal remains. But the Krapina assemblage dates to around 130,000 years ago—tens of thousands of years before moderns reached Europe. If the Neandertals there were making jewelry, their endeavor cannot be chalked up to modern influence. They must have conceived of this form of symbolic expression on their own.  Ultimately, such adornments feed into the million-dollar question of whether Neandertals had language, because both art and language stem from the ability to think symbolically. Archaeologists used to hold that symbolic thinking and other elements of so-called behavioral modernity emerged only within the past 50,000 years or so and in anatomically modern humans alone. But traces of symbolic behavior far older than that have emerged at early modern human sites in Africa. The fact that Neandertals decorated their bodies (and their cave homes) suggests that both Neandertals and moderns inherited this capacity for symbolic thinking—and, by extension, language—from an even older common ancestor.  For more on Neandertal cognition, check out my feature article in the February 2015 Scientific American.
Work Log, EMG sensor build-up and Hooking up Arduino with MAX/MSP  I went to the main building of Electronic department today and got this EMG sensor done today.  The sensor is purchased from an American company called Advancer Technologies. For power supply, 2x 9v batteries to be used. Cables have been mounted onto a connecter.  So the data collected from EMG sensor will be sent into a microprocessor, which is the Arduino that I have. Because I haven't actually used Arduino before, it did take me quite some time to figure out how to connect Arduino with Max/Msp. So that I think it is necessary for myself to write the procedure down for future reference.  1. Download the lastest Arduino compiler on the website.  2. Download the lastest Firmata, or use the pre-installed one that comes with the Arduino software. (Not sure whether it is up-to-date will make a difference)  3. There are many types of Arduino on the market and mine is called Duemilanove. According to a tutorial on another website, it needs the lastest FTDI serial port drive in order for the device to be connected to the computer. Maybe only on MAC OS, I don't know. *This is the part that took me most of the time to figure out, as when I tried to upload any program, I simply could not find an option for USB connection on Arduino — Tools — Serial Port.  (lastest FTDI drive can be downloaded on http://www.ftdichip.com/Drivers/VCP.htm).  4. After installing the driver, go to Arduino — File — Examples — Firmata — StandardFirmata.  Click on upload. Then verify.  5. Job Done!! Now communication between the computer and the microprocessor can be done entirely (not exactly entire function, but data in/out should work just fine) through Max/Msp without writing any program using Arduino software.  6. Main Interface of the latest Maxuino.  Update of the log:  Maxuino is not a necessary choose for reading data from Arduino, in fact, I personally think it makes things more complicated. Simply check out the serial communication tutorial on Max. It gives a simple and clear demonstration of how to get data from the Arduino.  Advertisements
2And on the 7th day God finished his work which he had made; and he rested on the 7th day from all his work which he had made. 3And God blessed the 7th day and made it holy, because on it he rested from all his work which God created to be made.  On the 7th and last day of this creation account, our author not only presents the deity resting from his creative work, but more significantly consecrating and blessing the 7th day as holy. That is to say, the creator god creates and proclaims the last day of creation as a holy day of rest, a Sabbath—distinct from the previous six non-sacred or common days.  This is a significant point which is largely neglected, misunderstood, and/or interpreted away by so-called modern day Creationists and fundamentalists who, despite their claims, do not believe in the creation of the world as presented here in Genesis. This is not some subjective or baseless claim that I am making, but one that the text itself, with its ancient worldview and culturally-formed beliefs, is making against the ignorantly and hypocritically drawn claims of Creationists. For they, as do all of us, perceive and live in a world which is radically at odds to that envisioned in this text and believed by its author, and by extension its god. We do not believe nor perceive the world to be inherently, essentially, and categorically divided up into sacred dates set by the lunar calendar, and a weekly occurring sacred day (our Saturday), which were created as sacred and holy by God himself when he created the earth and the skies. This is what our author believed. This was his worldview—not ours!  Thus, as we saw with the creation of the luminaries for the purpose of being able to observe and thus keep Yahweh's holy festivals (Genesis 1:14-19), the same applies here: the Sabbath is to be observed precisely because the god of creation created the 7th day as a holy, sacred day when he created the world. This is our author's point. And it explains why the punishment for non-observance was so severe.  From the perspective of our author and his priestly guild, to blatantly neglect and not keep that which the god of the world created at creation as a sacred, distinct, holy day was blasphemous pure and simply. The punishment? Swift and inviolable death!  And Yahweh said… "And you shall observe the Sabbath because it is a holy thing to you. Anyone who desecrates it shall be put to death!… Six days work shall be done, and in the 7th day is a Sabbath, a ceasing, a holy thing to Yahweh. Anyone who does work on the Sabbath day shall be put to death. And the children of Israel shall observe the Sabbath, to make the Sabbath through their generations, an eternal covenant!" (Ex 31:12-16) These are the things that Yahweh commanded to do them: "Six days work shall be done, and in the 7th day you shall have a holy thing, a Sabbath, a ceasing to Yahweh. Anyone who does work in it shall be put to death!" (Ex 35:1-2) And the children of Israel were in the wilderness, and they found a man collecting wood on the Sabbath day… And Yahweh said to Moses: "The man shall be put to death! All the congregation is to batter him with stones outside the camp!" (Num 15:32-35)  All of these passage were written by the same author who wrote Genesis 1:1-2:3—an elite Aaronid priest (see Priestly writer).  Again, our task is not to judge the beliefs of this author and by extension his god, or to judge whether the punishment of death for any and all violations of this "eternal" divinely-decreed law is just, nor is it our task to harmonize or interpret away this author's belief system so that it meshes with our own modern beliefs and worldview, or to ignorantly and hypocritically claim that his beliefs and worldview, and by extension those of his god, are our beliefs and worldview. These types of practices are all negligent of and disingenuous toward this ancient text, its author, and its beliefs—and by extension those of its god!  Rather our goal is to understand the text. To understand his beliefs and see them as a product of his worldview. To understand why this author felt so strongly about violations against the observance of the Sabbath that he evidently placed this belief as an "eternal law" on the lips of his god, Yahweh. In short, what could possibly have been seen as the appropriate punishment for profaning that part of the created world which god Yahweh made and created as holy at creation but death? This was the worldview of our ancient elite priest and his
When should we be alarmed about so much wealth in so few hands?  The Great Recession and its anemic recovery only deepened the economic inequality that's drawn so much attention in its wake. Nearly all wealth and income gains since then have flowed to the top one-tenth of America's richest 1 percent.  The very wealthiest 400 Americans command dizzying fortunes. Their combined net worth, as catalogued in the 2015 Forbes 400 list, is $2.34 trillion. You can't make this list unless you're worth a cool $1.7 billion.  "America's skewed wealth is one of the most critical issues of our time."  These 400 rich people — including Bill Gates, Donald Trump, Oprah Winfrey, and heirs to the Wal-Mart fortune — have roughly as much wealth as the bottom 61 percent of the population, or over 190 million people added together, according to a new report I co-authored.  That equals the wealth of the nation's entire African-American population, plus a third of the Latino population combined.  A few of those 400 individuals are generous philanthropists. But extreme inequality of this sort undermines social mobility, democracy, and economic stability. Even if you celebrate successful entrepreneurship, isn't there a point things go too far?  To me, 400 people having more money than 190 million of their compatriots is just that point.  Concentrating wealth to this extent gives rich donors far too much political power, including the wherewithal to shape the rules that govern our economy. Half of all political contributions in the 2016 presidential campaign have come from just 158 families, according to research by The New York Times.  The wealth concentration doesn't stop there. The richest 20 individuals alone own more wealth than the entire bottom half of the U.S. population.  This group — which includes Gates, Warren Buffet, the Koch brothers, Mark Zuckerberg, and Google co-founders Larry Page and Sergey Brin, among others — is small enough to fit on a private jet. But together they've hoarded as much wealth as 152 million of their fellow Americans.  Many of the richest 400 Americans amassed their wealth through successful companies and innovation. But they've all benefited enormously from a system of trade, tax, and regulatory rules tipped in favor of the wealthy at the expense of wage earners.  Tax policies, for instance, routinely target income from investments at lower rates than wages from work. These rules disproportionately benefit the Forbes 400, especially those working in finance.  This dominance endures across generations. As the French economist Thomas Piketty has warned, the United States is becoming an aristocracy dominated by people who've inherited great wealth and power.  Do we want the next generation of politics to be dominated by the heirs of Amazon founder Jeff Bezos or Wal-Mart heir Jim Walton? If not, it'll take strong and strategic public policies to reverse these trends.  Raising the minimum wage so all full-time workers can make enough money to live on would be a start.  And overhauling the campaign finance system so the richest Americans can no longer dictate which political candidates will be viable is a crucial next step. In the 2016 presidential race, Bernie Sanders is the lone top-tier candidate who isn't receiving massive contributions from what he calls "the billionaire class."  These policies may reduce inequality, but they won't slow the concentration of wealth. Achieving that goal will require reinstituting the progressive income tax policies of previous generations. Given today's economy, this should include a wealth tax on billionaires.  America's skewed wealth is one of the most critical issues of our time. Unless we defuse this threat to our democracy, we're destined to become a society governed by the sons and daughters of today's billionaires.
AFP/Madrid  Spain and Portugal are grappling with a devastating drought which has left rivers nearly dry, sparked deadly wildfires and devastated crops -- and experts warn that prolonged dry spells will become more frequent.  The national weather office says 94 percent of Portugal is enduring what it classifies as an 'extreme' drought.  'The country has never experienced a drought like this in the sense that it worsened significantly in October, a time of the year when the situation normally improves,' a climatologist with the weather office, Fatima Espirito Santo, told AFP.  Two-thirds of Spain has received considerably less rain during the last three years than it normally does.  'It's a ruinous situation,' said Jose Ramon Gonzalez, a small rancher in Spain's normally rainy northwestern region of Galicia.  Due to the scarcity of grass, Gonzalez was forced to spend thousands of euros to buy fodder for his cattle in July, four months earlier than normal.  'There are rivers, springs, which neither I, at the age of 45, nor my parents, nor my grandparents, have seen dry which have dried up,' he said.  About 1.38 million hectares (3.4 million acres) of grains, sunflowers and olive trees have been affected by drought or frost in Spain as of the end of October, according to Spanish farming insurance agency Agroseguro.  It has dished out more than 200 million euros ($236 million) in compensation this year.  'You feel helpless like when you are sick, you can't do anything. This sickness is called drought,' said Vicente Ortiz, a farmer and rancher in Spain's central Castilla-La Mancha region, whose endless plain is depicted in 'Don Quixote', the famous work by Miguel de Cervantes.  Ortiz said his grain harvest has plunged 70 percent from last year and he expects to harvest half as many olives.  The situation is just as dire for farmers across the border in neighbouring Portugal.  'All crops are suffering from this lack of water in our region, from olives to grains and grapes,' said Fremelinda Carvalho, the president of the association of farmers on Portalegre in central Portugal.  The dry fields and forests have fuelled wildfires, which killed 109 people this year in Portugal and five in Galicia, many dying in their cars as they tried to flee the flames.  - Water conflicts -  Water reservoirs are at abnormally low levels.  In Portugal 28 of the country's water reservoirs in October were at less than 40 percent of their storage capacity.  This weekend about a hundred fire trucks began transporting water from one dam in northern Portugal to another that is running dry and supplies water to Viseu, a city of around 100,000 residents.  In Spain the water reservoirs along the Tagus River, which empty into the Atlantic near Lisbon, were as of Monday at just 39.3 percent of their capacity.  The levels were even lower in the Douro River further north and the Segura River, which is used to irrigate crops in southeastern Spain.  Spain's largest power company, Iberdrola, saw its hydroelectric power production plunge 58 percent during the first nine months of the year, compared to the same period last year, pushing up electricity prices.  The drought is also fuelling conflicts among regions over the use of water.  One source of tension is a massive aqueduct built in the 1960s during the Spanish dictatorship of Francisco Franco to siphon off water from the Tagus River to the smaller Segura River.  The Tagus River 'can not support' this aqueduct, said Antonio Luengo, head of the agency that regulates water in Spain's Castilla-La Mancha region.  The water diverted from the Tagus had been used to massively develop fruit and vegetable farms in southeastern Spain and now water from the Mediterranean must be desalinated to support these crops, he said.  - Climate risks -  Experts warn that droughts are likely to become more frequent and severe in the region.  'Spain has since 1980 shown signs of climate change, which have increased since 2000,' said Jorge Olcina, who heads the University of Alicante's climate institute.  The country's climate 'tends to have more subtropical characteristics. Higher temperatures and rarer and more intense rains. So climate-related risks -- heatwaves and rain and droughts and floods, will increase in the coming decades,' he added.  Spain has managed water 'very badly', said Julio Barea, spokesman for the Spanish branch of Greenpeace.  He cited as examples the use of water to irrigate trees that do not normally need much water, such as olive and almond trees, and the planting of water-intensive crops that are not suited to Spain
A Look Back at GODZILLA's 2004 Theatrical Release  Author: Steve Ryfle with Bruce Goldstein  Pressbook Editor: Bruce Goldstein  Source: Rialto Pictures  The following production notes were created by Rialto Pictures for their 2004 theatrical release of GODZILLA. The text is © 2004 Rialto Pictures and © 1998 ECW Press. Godzilla ®, Gojira ® and the character design are trademarks of Toho Co. Ltd. All rights reserved.  50th Anniversary Release! The Complete, Uncut Original! 40 Minutes of Unseen Footage!  GODZILLA  Rialto Pictures Presents the Landmark Monster Movie in Its Original Japanese Version, Never Before Released in the U.S.  Uncut, uncensored, and undubbed, the original "Monster of Mass Destruction" returns to the big screen like you've never seen him before, fully restored with 40 minutes of unseen footage and completely revised subtitles. See where it all began, with this influential classic that has spawned scores of sequels and imitations, but has never been bettered.  On a sunny day and calm waters, a Japanese steamer sinks in flames when the sea erupts; a salvage vessel sent to the rescue disappears the same way; exhausted, incoherent survivors babble of a monster. Could it be…? GODZILLA was one the biggest budgeted films in Japanese history at that time, costing more than twice as much as the average Japanese movie. An enormous hit, it spawned 50 years of sequels, countless rip-offs, and a new genre: the kaiju eiga, or Japanese monster movie. Sold to an American distributor a year later, it was re-cut, re-arranged, dubbed, and re-titled GODZILLA KING OF THE MONSTERS with added scenes (shot in Hollywood) of a pre-PERRY MASON Raymond Burr observing the action from the sidelines.  The original Japanese GODZILLA is one of the great films by a sci-fi master, Ishiro Honda (Akira Kurosawa's close friend and occasional second unit director). The U.S. cut ran 20 minutes shorter, with another 20 snipped to make room for Burr, so that nearly a third (about 40 minutes) was shorn. The unrelentingly grim American version excised all of the film's comic relief (including some astonishing, Strangelove-like black humor) and censored its strong anti-H-Bomb message, turning it into a run-of-the-mill, monster-on-the-loose picture.  In Japan, the original, un-bastardized GODZILLA is regarded as one of the great classics of the cinema. In 1984, the prestigious film journal Kinema Junpo rated it among the top 20 Japanese films of all time. In 1989, a survey of 370 Japanese movie critics, Nihon Eiga Besuto 150 (Best 150 Japanese Films), ranked Godzilla the 27th greatest Japanese feature ever made.  The real (human) star of the movie is Takashi Shimura (best known for his Kurosawa roles, including the leader of THE SEVEN SAMURAI and the doomed man of IKIRU), as a revered paleontologist who insists that Godzilla must be studied, not destroyed (he's in the minority). This first Godzilla is truly terrifying — a 30-story Jurassic behemoth intent on destroying an exquisitely detailed miniature Tokyo — a tour de force by special effects genius Eiji Tsubaraya. Tsubaraya's use of "suitmation" — the often-belittled "actor in monster suit" method — was due to time and budget restraints, but, in concert with noirish cinematography, his low-tech approach is still as thrilling as ever. This print also features new subtitles by Bruce Goldstein and Michie Yamakawa.  GODZILLA ゴジラ  CAST  Dr. Kyohei Yamane…………………………………………………………………………………..Takashi Shimura  Emiko Yamane…………………………………………………………………………………………..Momoko Kochi  Ogata……………………………………………………………………………………………………Akira Takarada  Dr. Serizawa……………………………………………………………………………………………..Akihiko Hirata  Reporter Hagiwara………………………………………………………………………………………..Sachio Sakai  Dr. Tanabe…………………………………………………………………………………………….Fuyuki Murakami  CEO of Nankai Shipping Co……………………………………………………………………….Toranosuke Ogawa  Masaji…………………………………………………………………………………………………….Ren Yamamoto  Chairman of the Diet………………………………………………………………………………………Ken Hayashi  Odo Island mayor Inada………………………………………………………………………………….Keiji Sakakida  Senator Ooyama……………………………………………………………………………………………Seijiro
2018 River Herring Survey  Calling all Citizen Scientists!  We need your help for the 2018 Long Island Volunteer River Herring Survey!  Alewife and Blueback Herring are species of river herring native to Long Island. Like salmon, they are diadromous, which means they split their life cycle between salt water and fresh water. Each spring they return from the ocean to "run" up Long Island's tributaries to spawn in fresh water. Unfortunately, dams and culverts have restricted their access to most of this important habitat.  Seatuck is working with partners across the region to improve access and restore local populations of these ecologically important fish. The Long Island Volunteer River Herring Survey - organized by Seatuck, the Long Island Sound Study and Peconic Estuary Program - aims to find the tributaries where "remnant" runs of river herring still exist and then to monitior the size and timing of those runs.  Participants in the survey are asked to commit to surveying a local tributary from mid-March through mid-May. The survey protocol involves visiting a neighborhood river or stream and spending 15 minutes looking for alewife or signs of their presence. The visits can occur daily, weekly or as often as possible. All data is good data - the more trained eyes we have on our tributaries, the better. Observations and information from the survey visit is then submitted through a easty-to-use form on your computer or mobile device and automatically becomes part of our study.  FINAL Training Session:  Thursday, March 15, 6:00 - 7:00, Scully Estate, Islip - RSVP/Info: This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it.This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it.  BONUS, the 3/15 training will be followed by a screening of DamNation! at 7:30 - join us!
BW semi-spirit themed tempo/aggro deck. The cards we run aren't individually powerful, most die like flies, but have a lot of potential for a tempo'y deck where you counter, blink or hexproof all of your opponent's attempts of dealing with your prodding.  Each creature does something extra for the greater good, allowing everyone to keep pressure up.  Rattlechains: Keep in mind that playing this on the end step gives your opponent the chance to remove it when its Hexproof is still on the stack.  Bygone Bishop, Anafenza, Kin-Tree Spirit: Although these are great engines, generally might be a good idea to hold these back until you're up 1-2 mana to protect them with a counterspell / Essence Flux. Generally, losing your guys to removal kills your tempo pretty hard.  Thunderclap Wyvern: Surprisingly, since you often have 1-2 flyers out at any point, this can swing the game in your favor in a major way. Depending on your opponent, consider playing this with a counterspell up.  Stratus Dancer: Still in testing, this might end up in the sideboard. Not having your guys die as they keep smashing in is what the deck is all about. Doesn't synergize well with Essence Flux though, which is a shame.  Negate: I find it mandatory, at the very least very important to run this as a 4x in main. So far I haven't been able to reliably aggro with this deck, absolutely everything dies to removal, Planeswalkers wreck us and ramp/draw effects quickly leave us behind. 4x Negate is well enough to make it unsafe for your opponent to freely cast their things and allows you to further mess up their tempo by taking out key spells.  Surprisingly, creatures haven't been a problem to this deck at all. 4-5x Silkwrap/Stasis Snare and Reflector Mage are easily enough to keep the board clear enough for you. You don't need to remove everything and a lot of the time the creatures our opponents have aren't a big deal. Gives even further reasons for running Negate.  Essence Flux: Even though Flux doens't seem amazing, it does something against absolutely every deck and it comboes with every card at least decently. Targetting Topplegeist makes it a buff and a combat trick while dodging a removal. To Rattlechains it's a buff and saves up to two targets from removal. With Reflector Mage you get another bounce while dodging. Anafenza, Kin-Tree Spirit gives you more counters on top of more counters. While you may not always want Flux, it's such a flexible card that really holds the deck together.  Ojutai's Command: I consider this a resiliency play - The average use I see is bringing Rattlechains back and drawing a card, although countering a big creature and drawing/bringing Rattlechains back is a decent one too. I haven't tested this too much, but it seems to do a lot to fix the biggest problem with this deck - losing Rattlechains before it can be replaced.  Any feedback and criticism especially is welcome, wanted and encouraged! I've previously played both control and aggro, but tempo is a new thing for me. I feel this concept might give me something to practice as this playstyle seems fairly powerful once it's mastered.
From the "Don't try this at home kids" department....  My daughter has an orthodontic expander but lost the key yesterday. The orthodontist is closed for the week and she is supposed to have it cranked every day. I happened to have some nice stainless steel hex keys and for my first prototype bent one at an angle (see photo) and it was successful. Then using FreeCAD I designed a more elaborate thing as shown here.  The blue and white tool in the photo is what I am replacing with a 3D printed version. After it's printed I will cut down one of the hex keys and press fit it into the hub.  Edit: As soon as the glue dries, I can snap the yellow pieces together, and it will get used for at least a few days until the next orthodontist appointment.  Edit 27FEB2017:  I had a successful use of the home printed version on Saturday, then on Sunday my daughter found her original key so we went back to the OEM version. It was interesting to compare mine as printed with the OEM version- one feature lacking in mine was a little jog in the business end that keeps it from going in too deep and potentially scraping the roof of her mouth. Dimensionally otherwise my version was pretty close to the OEM version. Verdict: successful experiment.
University of North Carolina at Greensboro uses your network username and password to login to Box. Continue to login to Box through your network.  Welcome to the UNCG Box  ITS is pleased to announce that "Box" is a fully supported online file storage service, available to all UNCG users. Visit http://its.uncg.edu/box for more information.  Like all UNCG-provided technology resources, the use of Box is governed by UNCG's technology policies, as well as Box's own Terms of Service. Please take time to review the information on this website: http://its.uncg.edu/Box/Terms/
Psychology has about as many opinions about human nature as the S.A.B.P.C has about which bassist or bass is the best. This column takes a satirical look at some of the main movements in psychology by asking each to answer the following question:   Why do people play the bass?   Freudian Psychoanalysis. The individual plays the bass due to subconscious sexual and aggressive drives. The bass is a phallic symbol that masks the anxiety that resulted from the (male) bassist's fear as a young child that his father would castrate him because of his amorous feelings towards his mother. For the female bassist, the bass compensates for penis envy.   Adlerian Psychoanalysis . Playing the bass is a way of overcoming feelings of inferiority caused in the childhood.   Behaviourism . The individual has no choice whether or not he or she wants to play the bass. He or she has been conditioned to do so and therefore does it.   Cognitive psychology . Playing the bass is the result of an intricate network of inherent and learnt information processing mechanisms. The individual takes into account a wide variety of information and then makes the decision to play the bass.   Humanistic psychology . Individuals play the bass in their process of becoming a whole and mature being. Playing the bass helps him or her to fulfil needs for self-actualisation, fulfil his or her potential, and have peak experiences. Thus, the bass helps the player to grow and develop as a unique human being.   Existential psychology. Playing the bass is the individual's choice, an expression of his or her complete individual freedom. However, this freedom also makes it his or her responsibility to play the bass. Finally, It also helps the individual to cope with the fact that he or she will inevitably die.   Physiological psychology . Playing the bass is the result of the interactions among brain structures and chemical and electric impulses stimulated in the brain.   Abnormal psychology . The voices make them do it.   Logotherapy . The individual plays the bass because he or she finds meaning in it. Without that meaning, life is a deep dark pit of despair. Thus, the bass saves the individual from committing suicide and helps him or her to transcend everyday life towards an ultimate meaning.   Evolutionary psychology . The bassist (Homo Bassist Superior) is the result of many millennia of evolution from the species Homo Inferior Drummer and Homo Neanderthal Guitarist. The principle of natural selection states that only the strong survive, which guarantees the continued existence of this rare breed.   Phenomenological psychology . We can only understand why the individual plays the bass by asking him or her. There is no universal reason or subjective truth that says why people play the bass - every individual is unique.   Experimental psychology . To answer that question, we will draw a representative sample from the population of bass players and divide it into two equal groups. One group will receive an intervention, the other won't. Thereafter, we will use advanced statistical procedures to determine if the groups are significantly different. If they are, then we know that people play the bass because of the experimental effect. If they are not, you messed up the experiment.   Feminist psychology . Men play the bass because it is an instrument through which they can maintain the patriarchal status quo of society and thus keep suppressing women. To correct this inequality, the bass has to change fundamentally. Women have to break the glass ceiling and take what is rightfully theirs – the bass.   Developmental psychology . Someone plays the bass because of the stage of development, or critical life stage, he or she is in. Playing the bass is a critical event in itself, which causes changes in the individual's personality.   Social psychology. Playing the bass is the result of the actual, imagined, or implied presence of others. In other words, they made me do it (this fits people who play the bass because everyone else in the band told them to).   Social constructionist psychology . We can't be sure that they are playing the bass. The bass has been socially constructed through language and is thus only played if people say they do. We never ask why.   Community psychology. The question is not why people play the bass. The question is how can we help everyone to own a bass?   Pop psychology . If you really want to know the answer to the question, look deep inside yourself, and then buy my book, "Why the bass? A guide to self-improvement" for only R99995 (VAT and P&P excl.). If you call now, you will get five cents off the delivery costs! That's right: FIVE CENTS!   Industrial/organisational psychology . Did someone say play? Get back to work!   Now, next time people ask you why you play that thingie with the four strings and not a real instrument
Republican leaders have been arguing against net neutrality since Barack Obama announced on Monday that he wanted to reclassify Internet providers as a utility.  In his prepared remarks, the president said that, "simply put, no service should be stuck in a 'slow lane' because it does not pay a fee. That kind of gate-keeping would undermine the level playing field essential to the Internet's growth."  SPONSORED  Texas Senator Ted Cruz responded by calling the president's proposal "Obamacare for the Internet," and insisted that "the Internet should not operate at the speed of government."  House Speaker John Boehner quickly followed, saying in a statement that "[a] n open, vibrant Internet is essential to a growing economy, and net neutrality is a textbook example of the kind of Washington regulations that destroy innovation and entrepreneurship."  The Republican argument is based on a 2005 Supreme Court ruling, National Cable & Telecommunications Association v. Brand X Internet Services, in which the court upheld that the Federal Communications Commission was correct to rule that bundled broadband Internet was not a traditional utility, and should therefore be treated differently than "telecommunications services" like phone companies.  However, attached to that ruling is a dissent by beloved conservative firebrand Antonin Scalia, in which the Supreme Court Justice makes a compelling argument that just because broadband services are not offered on a "stand-alone" basis, that does not mean they should be treated as different from services that are.  "It seems to me, that the analytic problem pertains not really to the meaning of 'offer,' but to the identity of what is offered," he wrote.  "It would be odd to say that a car dealer is in the business of selling steel or carpets because the cars he sells include both steel frames and carpeting. Nor does the water company sell hydrogen, nor the pet store water (though dogs and cats are largely water at the molecular level)."  "The pet store may have a policy of selling puppies only with leashes," Scalia continued, "but any customer will say that it does offer puppies — because a leashed puppy is still a puppy, even though it is not offered on a 'stand-alone' basis."
The telephone operators who answer questions about Healthcare.gov, the website for buying Affordable Care Act insurance, have been busy lately. That's not surprising, given that Tuesday is the last day to purchase coverage for the rest of 2017.  But this year, something is different: Obamacare's future is in doubt. And that's made for some difficult moments.  Republicans have vowed to repeal the 2010 health care law and President Donald Trump has already issued an executive order that could weaken the program while it's still on the books. The damage to the market could start in 2018 ― or even earlier, under some scenarios.  With these possibilities getting more and more attention in the media, the people who have coverage through Obamacare are getting worried ― and, as one phone operator told The Huffington Post, they have been calling. "It's heartbreaking, because we can't tell these people that it will be okay, because we don't know if it will be okay."  The operator was careful to say that not everybody calling is in a panic. In fact, a sizable minority of people are telephoning just to say how happy they are that the law, which they really don't like, might finally go away.  But more often than not, the callers are scared ― and it seems the attendants haven't gotten specific guidance on what to tell them. The Obama administration would routinely send along updated scripts when a news event was likely to prompt new questions and calls, but, according to this operator, there's been nothing like that since Trump took office.  They don't know if they're going to be able to take their medicines, or see their doctors.  The operator, who works for a government contractor, agreed to answer questions about this year's open enrollment ― and what callers are saying. The only condition was anonymity, because workplace rules forbid employees from speaking to the media. (The Huffington Post verified the operator's identity independently.)  What follows is a transcript of that interview, lightly edited for clarity.  What are you hearing this year that is different?  Because the website is working so much better … the people calling us don't really need us like they needed us before. It used to be that people relied on us to walk them through the application process. Now, they just need questions answered. And now a lot of those people are asking questions like, "Will I have health insurance?" We can't really answer them with certainty.  There's also a clear division now. You have some people, they want to know what will happen to their health insurance. They don't know if they're going to be able to take their medicines, or see their doctors. And that's about 60, maybe 70 percent of the calls we end up getting. The rest, so I guess that's the other 30 to 40 percent, are people who are saying I can't wait for this to go away.  The ones who say they can't wait for it to go away. What do they say?  They don't like to have to fill in an application for insurance for a doctor they can't visit because, you know, he's 60 miles away, in another town. It's not someplace they go regularly. Sometimes they say that the deductibles or the monthly premiums are just too much.  Sometimes they say that the deductibles or the monthly premiums are just too much.  In the past, we've had people call us and they'd be like those folks you hear about ― they'd have a negative attitude about the health care law. And then they would find what the price would actually be, and they were amazed. In a good way. But there hasn't been so much of that this year. I think everybody whose mind could have been changed has been changed.  What about the 60 to 70 percent, the ones who are worried, what are those like?  These people are calling in, and they want to make sure they will be covered. They want reassurances that if they sign up for insurance right now, that it will still be in effect for the rest of the year.  The answer we give them is that, according to the information we've been given, we believe they will have coverage. If they are signing up through open enrollment, then they should have the insurance, and they will get the tax credits if they are eligible, at least through the end of the year ― again, based on the information that has been given to us. Congress has given us no indication that they will pull everything.  The problem is that everything is so up in the air. And people know it. They are calling us with questions, and we don't know what to tell them, because no one has given us any indication of what may happen. So there's a general unease around here, about everyone who is calling in and talking to us. They just want to know, and we don't feel like we have definitive
"An Italian luxury car company founded in Bologna at the beginning of the 20th Century that focused on racing cars. Having failed to win many Grand Prix, they focused on making sports cars that impress vapid women. They've done this exceptionally well." ―Southern San Andreas Super Autos description.   The Lampadati Felon is a four-door luxury coupé in Grand Theft Auto V and Grand Theft Auto Online.  Contents show]  Design  Grand Theft Auto V  The Felon is inspired by the fifth generation Maserati Quattroporte as seen by its overall design, greenhouse area and side profile. Some of its details are inspired by the Jaguar XF, such as a XF-R front fascia, large thin vertical wheel vents, front and rear lights, and rear chrome. The Felon's features also take cues from the second generation Saab 9-5 as seen on the front end. The car's taillights have a resemblance to the Tesla Model S.  The front bumper features three intakes with the central intake being the least tall of the three, occupying half the width of the front bumper. To either side of this intake, there are two taller, chrome-trimmed intakes, with upper edges that are parallel to the lower edge of the headlamp units. Above the central intake there is a large, chrome-trimmed main grille with a curved lower edge and straight top edge, with a manufacturer emblem inset. Beginning from half the grille height there are chrome-edged headlamp units with a curved lower edge and a flat top edge. These headlamp units feature two circular lamps closest to the center, and a turn indicator lamp, furthest on the outside. The car features a long bonnet/hood with two levels of elevation. The first signified by the line from the corner of the grille to its respective corner of the windscreen. The second level of elevation is inset centrally on the first.  The sides are formed mainly from a range of smooth, elegant curves. The wheel arches are flared, creating a more muscular appearance. Behind the long front quarter area the main body is smooth, with the only extra formation being a tall, thin duct behind the front wheel arch. The greenhouse area features small body-coloured wing mirrors (mounted on the window area, near the base of the A-pillars, chrome-trimmed windows and door handles. The B-pillars are neither chrome-trimmed nor body coloured. The rear wheel arch features a more prominent bulge than the front. Above, a long, elegant C-pillar can be seen, clearly illustrating the luxurious element of the car's design. By default the car features eight-spoke wheels with split edges connecting the spokes to the lip of the wheel. The wheels are wrapped in low-profile tyres.  The rear of the car draws on more XFR design elements and features rear lamp units that are dominantly red, which partly have the horizontal chrome trim inset. The horizontal trim also forms the top edge for the impressed license plate area. Beneath these there is a rear bumper that protrudes from the main body in two levels, with the lower half having more elevation. The base of the bumper features a polymer covered area which spans the entire width and houses quad exhaust tips.  Current Design Gallery   Performance  Grand Theft Auto V  The car has mediocre performance. It has average acceleration, which is partially let down by its heavy weight, and its front engine, rear wheel drive layout. The engine sounds to be a flat-plane engine, which sounds rather low-revving and doesn't provide enough power for above-average acceleration. On the plus side, the vehicle has excellent durability. Wheel camber is rare and if it occurs, occurs to a minimal extent. The engine is well protected against gun-fire from other players, and is an-all round tough vehicle for head on crashes. Rolling the vehicle does little deformation in the pillars thanks to rather firm A, B and C pillars, particularly the latter.  Braking is the vehicle's good side. While the car is rather heavy, it appears to have large disk brakes and the car can come to a halt almost immediately, and still impressively quick from high speeds.  The engine cover appears to be a low-detail single-cam V10, due to the length, though shares the same design as the V8 cover found in many cars, such as the Blista, albeit lacking the engine cover bolts.  GTA V Overview   Vehicle Statistics - Grand Theft Auto V Acceleration  (0-60 mph in Seconds) Top Speed  (mph / kmh) Gears Engine Drivetrain  (FWD / RWD / AWD) Mass  (kg / lbs) Fuel Tank  Size (litres) Handling.meta N/A 90
De Havilland Mosquito FB Mk VI  Somewhat ironically, considering that the aircraft had first been developed as an unarmed bomber, the most numerous variant of the Mosquito was the FB Mk VI fighter bomber, which combined the eight guns of the F Mk II with the capacity to carry a useful bomb load.  Work first began on the FB Mk VI in the summer of 1941. The first prototype flew on 1 June 1942, and production aircraft began to appear in February 1943. Early aircraft were powered by 1,460 hp Merlin 21 or 23 engines, later replaced by the 1,635 hp Merlin 25.  The FB Mk VI was armed with four .303in machine guns and four 20mm cannon, just as had been planned for the day fighter version. It could carry two 500lb bombs in the rear half of its bomb bay (the front half was used by the cannons). Additionally the Mk VI had two wing mounting points that allowed it to carry either 50 gallon drop tanks, or two more 500lb bombs, for a total bomb load of 2,000lbs. Fully armed the FB Mk VI had an effective range of over 1000 miles.  Late in 1944 the Mosquito FB Mk VI was used to carry up to eight rocket projectiles. The first Mosquito attack with RPs was carried out in October 1944.  The FB Mk VI entered service with No. 418 Squadron, which received its first aircraft on 11 May 1943. Eventually it equipped 26 RAF squadrons, seeing service over Europe and the Far East as well as from bases on Malta. It was also used by Coastal Command on anti-shipping duties. The FB Mk VI carried out some of the most daring Mosquito raids of the war, amongst them the famous attack on Amiens Prison on 18 February 1944.  Mosquito Aces of World War 2, Andrew Thomas. This volume concentrates on the fighter variants of the Mosquito, looking at their role as a defensive fighter, both over Britain and overseas and their use during the D-Day invasion to protect the fleet. Thomas also looks at the career of the Mosquito as a night intruder over Germany, where it became the scourge of the German night fighters, often being blamed for losses miles from the nearest Mosquito.  How to cite this article: Rickard, J (15 April 2007), De Havilland Mosquito FB Mk VI, http://www.historyofwar.org/articles/weapons_mosquito_VI.html  Help - F.A.Q. - Contact Us - Search - Recent - About Us - Subscribe in a reader - Join our Google Group - Cookies
A 48-year-old terminal cancer patient was rushed to the hospital from an Iowa courthouse Monday during his trial over felony charges for growing marijuana he uses as a treatment for his rare condition.  Brian Wellner of Iowa's Quad-City Times' first reported that paramedics took Benton Mackenzie, who was expected to take the stand in his trial in Scott County District Court on Monday, from the courtroom to a local hospital after he complained of extreme pain and hallucinations related to his angiosarcoma, a rare and aggressive form of cancer of the blood vessels which has produced large lesions on Mackenzie's skin.  Despite Mackenzie's deteriorating condition, his trial is expected to be completed Friday, Linda Bowman, the judicial trial court supervisor at the Scott County Clerk's Office, told The Huffington Post. If Mackenzie is found guilty, he faces at least three years in prison -- a punishment that he's said equates to a death sentence.  "If I'm found guilty at all, I'm a dead man," Mackenzie told Quad-City in May.  WARNING: GRAPHIC IMAGE APPEARS BELOW, READER DISCRETION IS ADVISED.   Iowa Gov. Terry Branstad (R) signed a limited measure into law in May that legalizes the use of CBD, or cannabidiol, a non-psychoactive compound found in cannabis and used in the treatment of seizures. However, the state has not legalized the broader use of medical marijuana, as 23 states have done. According to FreeBenton.org, a website documenting Mackenzie's case, Mackenzie has never cultivated cannabis to sell or distribute, but instead has used the plants for personal medical purposes to make the CBD oil and treat his cancerous tumors.  Iowa's CBD law protects use of the same marijuana-derived oil that Mackenzie uses, but the law's narrow focus on treatment of only "intractable epilepsy" does not apply to or legally protect Mackenzie.  District Court Judge Henry Latham ruled in May that Mackenzie is barred from using his condition as a defense in court during his trial as a reason for why he was growing marijuana, the Associated Press reported.  "I'm not allowed to give proof why I was using," Mackenzie told the Quad-City Times. "Now, there is no fair trial."  Photos documenting Mackenzie's case and the growth of the cancerous lesions have been posted to the "Free Benton Mackenzie" Facebook page, a community forum dedicated to Mackenzie's case.  One of the most recent photos, from July 4, appears below:  In 2013, Mackenzie was arrested after local authorities seized 71 marijuana plants during a raid of his parents' home in Long Grove, Iowa. Marijuana in any form is illegal at the federal level, and Iowa lacks any broad legal medical marijuana framework.  Mackenzie, his wife Loretta, his son Cody (21) and his parents Charles and Dorothy (76 and 75, respectively) were all charged with various counts, from felonies to misdemeanors -- including hosting a drug house and conspiracy to grow and sell marijuana, the Washington Times reported. The trial for Mackenzie, his wife and their son began in early July.  Iowa's new CBD oil law isn't the state's first encounter with the prospects of legalizing marijuana for medical use. Back in 2010, the Iowa Board of Pharmacy unanimously recommended that the state legislature legalize the use of medical marijuana. Earlier this year, after several failed attempts to legalize the drug, the board's chairman said during a hearing that the organization lacks the authority to establish a medical marijuana program in the state, but sympathizes with the Iowa voters seeking legalization. State lawmakers need to make a decision on the matter, the chairman said.  Meanwhile, Iowa voters overwhelmingly support medical marijuana -- 81 percent are in favor of legalization, according to a recent poll.  In an op-ed over the weekend, the Des Moines Register editorial board weighed in on both the limited CBD oil law and the Mackenzie case.  "The change in law benefits only a small group of Iowans with the most organized lobbying efforts," the editorial board wrote. "Other sick Iowans should have legal access to marijuana extracts, too. These include people with painful and debilitating conditions like cancer, spinal cord injuries and severe arthritis, who may benefit from the drug. But if these people obtain cannabis oil, they will still be considered criminals in this state."  Later on Monday, Wellner tweeted an update on Mackenzie:
Enjoy the chapter folks, and happy easter to those of you who do things for it! (If I remembered before I uploaded the chapter, I totally would have switched the snowflake for an easter egg in the credits… oops!)
Summer holiday done? Maybe it's time to think about where to head this winter…  If you're heading to the slopes this winter, you'll want to be sure you're getting the best deal. Us here at Gone Travelling are always waiting for the next winter season, so if you're like us and you want to be getting the most bang for your snow buck read on.  These are the best value ski resorts in Europe for beginner to intermediate skiers and snowboarders. We've based this list on:  Cost of lift pass.  Cost of accommodation.  Value for money for food/drink.  Apres ski options.  Options for beginners and intermediates.  So, read on for our advice about where to get your snow fix this winter!   This compact resort in this pretty compact country is ideal for beginner to intermediate skiers and snowboarders. It doesn't have the sprawling valleys of the French Alps to keep you occupied for a week, but you do have two great cities half an hour from the slopes; Both the capital Ljubljana and smaller university town, Kranj, are a stones throw from the mountain.  What this means is you get an affordable lift pass plus access to some culture in the evenings, if thats your kind of thing. This also means very cheap food and drink and great apres…  Cost? Do-able under £500  We ran a whole article about Zakopane as we were that impressed! Just to save you reading the whole article again… It's super cheap, it's not far from Krakow airport and you have a fantastic selection of slopes from mountains to smaller runs.  If you're a beginner or you're looking for budget skiing or snowboarding then we can't recommend Zakopane highly enough.  We recommend Whiteside or Go Ski for your affordable all in ski and snowboard packages.  Cost? Easily do-able under £500.  Just across the border from the much more expensive Swiss Alps, Sauze D'Oulx has an awesome array of slopes, plus a great town packed full of nightlife. Oh and it's much cheaper than Switzerland or France!  Sauze is generally geared more to intermediates with around half the runs 'red'. The ski area also links in to neighbouring Sestriere which is also a great place to base yourself.  Cost? £500-700 all in.  The stalwart of the cheap ski scene, Bulgaria has quite a few cheap options but Bansko is the best of the bunch. The slopes are a decent mix of beginner and intermediate, although access is via one fairly cramped gondola.  The mountain slopes have enough variety to keep all but the most demanding busy for a week and the town has excellent apres and cheap food and lodgings. Easily one of the best deals out there for beginners and bargain ski deal hunters.  Cost? Under £500.  Similar to Zakopane in Poland, Sumava has several smaller resorts spread out around a picturesque national park. Definitely more suited to beginners or casual intermediates, you'll be able to practice your turns on simple and nearly empty slopes. You'll need a different lift pass for each ski area but at around €15 per day each you won't be too bothered.  Apres ski isn't exactly bumping, but you will find quaint Czech bars and restaurants where you can eat and get drunk for loose change.  Cost? Well under £500.  Us at Gone Travelling have had some great times in Austria. Both Mayrhofen and St Anton are great resorts with a massive range of slopes and apres ski options. Plus, they're pretty damn cheap considering you're getting world class pistes.  Take a look at any of the ski package providers and pick a resort in Austria as you can be rest assured you'll be getting some great deals. From St Anton to Zell-am-See to Ellmau, it doesn't really matter where you end up. The apres will be easily as good as the skiing.  Cost? From around £500 and up.  One of the original budget ski destinations, Andorra is high in the Pyrenees and duty free. The Grandvalira resort is a result of joining up the massive and popular Soldeu, El Tarter and Pas de la Casa resorts into what is now the fifth biggest ski area in the world. Add to the fact that it's relatively cheap and you'll looking at a bargain ski holiday.  Andorra is notorious for it's raucous apres ski, so expect to be downing plenty of those duty free bevvies.  Cost? From around £500 and up.  Hang on, what? Morocco for skiing? Well… The country is fringed by
The world's most successful bitcoin brokerage is setting up operations in the UK!  Bitcoiniacs and Cointrader.net, the Canadian companies that brought the world its very first Bitcoin ATM, are quietly replicating their Vancouver business around the world. Last month with a partnership in Singapore and now a joint venture in London.  The Bitcoiniacs and Cointrader.net management team partnered with the UK Company QuickBitcoin to install a Bitcoin ATM inside the centrally located and already famous e-cig and coffee shop, The Vape Lab, just a few steps from Liverpool Street station.  "We are very happy to welcome their first bitcoin ATM of the UK into our shop, we put all our efforts to keep the The vape Lab at the forefront of ingenuity and creativity" say Pierre Durand and Jonathan Cadeilhan.  "The process of buying and selling bitcoin in the UK just got much easier" says Mitchell Demeter "we now offer our clients four different ways to trade."  The new company, operating as Cointrader UK, has brought the full package: customers can use the ATM, they can make an appointment to buy or sell in person, they can buy or sell small amounts online at quickbitcoin.co.uk, or they can fund their account and trade online at Cointrader.net. They will also be hosting weekly information sessions at The Vape Lab to help new users understand the basics of this new technology.  The Bitcoin community in London is expanding rapidly as entrepreneurs from around the world build businesses around this new currency. This is the 3rd Bitcoin ATM in the city, but it's the first full service Bitcoin company that offers multiple ways of trading and information sessions.  Cointrader UK invites everyone to come celebrate the official kick off of their European business on Tuesday, April 22nd at The Vape Lab located at 232 Shoreditch High Street between 4-10pm.  -- Hugh Halford-Thompson  Cointrader UK
Description  A dynamic remastering of the original BBC Radio 4 full-cast serial - Fit the First to Fit the Sixth - which spawned a phenomenal hitchhiking legend. The original series of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, remastered by Dirk Maggs (director of the Tertiary, Quandary and Quintessential Phases) to give a full, vibrant sound, now with Philip Pope's version of the familiar theme tune and specially re-recorded announcements by John Marsh. Join Arthur Dent, Ford Prefect, Trillian, Zaphod Beeblebrox and Marvin the Paranoid Android in their first series of adventures as they witness the destruction of Earth to make way for a hyperspace bypass, stumble upon the ancient planet of Magrathea, dine at the Restaurant at the End of the Universe, and seek an answer to the Ultimate Question of Life, The Universe And Everything. Peter Jones, Simon Jones, Geoffrey McGivern, Mark Wing-Davey, Susan Sheridan, Stephen Moore and a full supporting cast star in these BBC Radio 4 episodes. A special 55-minute bonus programme, Douglas Adams's Guide to the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, explores the genesis of the radio series and its incredible success, with contributions from the original cast and production team.
President Trump reportedly plans to merge the State Department and the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), according to a Monday Foreign Policy report  The White House budget proposal released in March previewed a proposed one-third cut to the U.S. government's financial assistance to developing countries, without providing too many details of what would be slashed.  ADVERTISEMENT  Field missions, regional bureaus, global health funding, and food programs are all on the chopping block, FP reports.  Acting USAID Administrator Wade Warren reportedly told employees in a recent staff meeting that the White House may merge USAID with the State Department in order to comply with Trump's executive order aiming to streamline the executive branch. The order requires every agency to submit a plan for the approval of Office of Management and Budget director Mick Mulvaney.  The administration's 2018 budget proposal pointedly suggests the consolidation, which says "the need for State and USAID to pursue greater efficiencies through reorganization and consolidation in order to enable effective diplomacy and development."  While the U.S. Information Agency folded into the State Department in 1999, the magazine reports that USAID could be a more polarizing merger because of its mission fight diseases and provide food security around the globe.  "That will end the technical expertise of USAID, and in my view, it will be an unmitigated disaster for the longer term," said Andrew Natsios, former USAID Administrator under President George W. Bush, told FP. "I predict we will pay the price. We will pay the price for the poorly thought out and ill-considered organization changes that we're making, and cuts in spending as well."  Congress would have to approve the budget, and it is not entirely clear whether the proposed reductions would pass.  The White House is expected to release a more detailed budget later this spring.  The State Department and USAID declined Foreign Policy's request for comment on the possible merger.  "[W]e intend to make the best use of U.S. taxpayer dollars by eliminating programs and prioritizing resources that most advance America's interests," a USAID spokesperson told the magazine.  FP obtained a 15-page internal State Department document detailing the administration's budget plans for the 2018 fiscal year, including its plans to curb foreign aid.
Michael Gove once waxed lyrical about Labour's last elected Prime Minister Tony Blair, "I can't hold it back any more; I love Tony!". Well, it's about time for a paid-up member of the liberal left to repay the compliment, because I can't hold it back any more; I love Govey.  Gove is now a secret liberal sleeper cell in the heart of the British establishment and remains our last hope of a nicer, more progressive society under the Tories. He's begun to make his mark as the new Justice Minister by putting a clear divide between him and the sheer ghastliness of the former incumbent Chris Grayling. Gove has the potential to be the most liberal Justice Secretary since Roy Jenkins, a true reformer who could take Britain away from its Victorian attitudes towards prison and justice, save the European Convention on Human Rights, while pushing back against autocrats like the Saudis. There's so much potential, but will the Tories let Gove be Gove?  One of Michael Gove's first acts went largely unnoticed but was hugely symbolic.The former Justice Secretary Chris Grayling placed restrictions on families and friends sending books, yes books, to people in prison, in what was billed to the press as a clampdown on prisoners' "perks and privileges". Some of the world's most famous authors, from Salmon Rushdie to Martin Amis and Elif Shafak, led by writers charity English PEN and the Howard League for Penal Reform, petitioned Grayling to back down, but he refused to meet with them or even engage on the issue. Britain's refusal to let families send their loved ones books struck a chord internationally, PEN prisoner of conscience Cameroonian poet Enoh Meyomesse wrote from his prison cell that books in prison "are like oxygen, they cannot be replaced". But Grayling refused to move. Books were "perks" and prison was for punishment. Within weeks of becoming the new Justice Secretary Gove reversed the ban, to little fanfare. And he didn't stop there.  At the last Conservative party conference, Gove made one of the most significant speeches on prison in a generation. Gove told the Tory party he wanted to place "unremitting emphasis" in jails on "reform, rehabilitation and redemption". What is crucial, he said, "is recognising that we should not treat prisoners as society's liabilities who we keep out of sight and out of mind while they do their time. We should see them as potential assets – people who can contribute to society and put something back."  Ramming home the point on reform, he emphasised that prison should be a place where inmates are offered a "second chance" by educating them: "When so many come into custody illiterate and innumerate it would be a crime if we didn't get them reading and writing when they are in our care." Compare Gove's speech with his predecessor Chris Grayling who said "I want to be the tough Justice Secretary", or Labour's Jack Straw, who attacked prison reformers as the "criminal justice lobby" and said he didn't lose sleep over prisoner numbers.  Shape Created with Sketch. UK news in pictures Show all 50 left Created with Sketch. right Created with Sketch. Shape Created with Sketch. UK news in pictures 1/50 30 September 2018 Protestors set off on an anti-Brexit march, organised by the 'Best For Britain' campaign group, in central Birmingham AFP/Getty 2/50 29 September 2018 Royal Navy Commander, Nathan Gray lands his F-35B onboard HMS Queen Elizabeth for the first time. Two F-35B Lightning II fighter jets have successfully landed onboard HMS Queen Elizabeth for the first time, laying the foundations for the next 50 years of fixed wing aviation in support of the UK's Carrier Strike Capability. Royal Navy Commander, Nathan Gray, 41, made history by being the first to land on, carefully manoeuvring his stealth jet onto the thermal coated deck. He was followed by Squadron Leader Andy Edgell, RAF, both of whom are test pilots, operating with the Integrated Test Force (ITF) based at Naval Air Station Patuxent River, Maryland. Shortly afterwards, once a deck inspection has been conducted and the all-clear given, Cdr Gray became the first pilot to take off using the ship's ski-ramp. © Crown copyright 2013 3/50 28 September 2018 Headteachers from across England and Wales hold signs in Parliament Square, London, as they prepare to march on Downing Street to demand extra money for schools PA 4/50 27 September 2018 Former leader of the English Defence League Tommy Robinson (C) arrives at the Old Bailey Courthouse in London, Britain, 27 September 2018. The far right figurehead whose real name is Stephen Yaxley-Lennon faces a rehearing after winning an appeal against a contempt of court finding last month. EPA 5/50 26 September 2018 Labour Leader Jeremy Corbyn delivers a keynote speech at the Labour Party Conference in Liverpool
There's a new book out called, 'Shattered.' It's about Hillary Clinton's presidential campaign, and Hillary people are livid at those who leaked the information to Jonathan Allen and Amie Parnes. Why? Because the book shows the campaign of Hillary Clinton for what it was: A poorly run campaign that relied heavily on arrogance and less on a strategy to win.  Just from reading excerpts and reviews, it's easy to see the book is a devastating look behind the scenes of the Clinton campaign and it has Hillary supporters howling. For the last five and half months, they've been reiterating different versions of "WE WUZ ROBBED!" to anybody who will listen. In their minds, Hillary didn't lose. Outside forces took it from her.  1. The Russians – Hillary's supporters are convinced the Trump campaign colluded with Russian government officials to hack voter data and use that information to engage in micro-targeting potential Trump voters to get out and vote for him.  2. F.B.I. Director James Comey – Hillary's supporters are also blaming James Comey, saying the release of his infamous letter in the closing days of the campaign shifted votes from Hillary to Trump. There is no evidence to support the allegation. Nate Silver of 538 says Hillary was "up by a lot" when Comey released his letter but as you'll see, that's not the case at all.  First on the Russian front. The FBI is conducting an investigation into Russian meddling and whether or not the collusion between Trump and the Russians described above, exists. Despite the efforts of some crackpots on the internet to make conclusions on their own, the FBI is well equipped to determine what happened and if any crimes were committed.  That said, there's no indication it helped flip the election to Donald Trump. The three states that ultimately cost Hillary Clinton the election are Michigan, Wisconsin, and Pennsylvania. All Hillary Clinton had to do was get the same amount of votes as Barack Obama did in 2012, and we'd be hearing people say, "Madame President," even with Donald Trump mildly outperforming Mitt Romney in the same states. Here are the numbers (vote totals):  Wisconsin 2012  Barack Obama: 1,620,985 / Mitt Romney: 1,407,966  Wisconsin 2016  Hillary Clinton: 1,382,201 / Donald Trump: 1,409,467  Difference: Hillary -238,784 / Donald Trump: +1,501  Michigan 2012  Barack Obama: 2,564,569 / Mitt Romney: 2,115,256  Michigan 2016  Hillary Clinton: 2,268,193 / Donald Trump: 2,279,805  Difference: Hillary -296,376 / Donald Trump +164,549  Pennsylvania 2012  Barack Obama: 2,990,974 / Mitt Romney: 2,680,434  Pennsylvania 2016  Hillary Clinton: 2,844,705 / Donald Trump: 2,912,941  Difference: Hillary -145,671 / Donald Trump +232,507  Total vote difference between Obama and Clinton from 2012 to 2016: -680,831  Total vote difference between Romney and Trump from 2012 to 2016: +398,557  Hillary Clinton received nearly 700,000 fewer votes in those three states in 2016 than Barack Obama did in 2012. The change was not a case of Hillary Clinton having the same amount of votes with Donald Trump getting more. Yes, Trump did improve upon Romney's numbers, and that says some of those voters shifted from the Democrat to the Republican. Where did the gaps exist? Largely among white working-class voters. The very same voters, Bill Clinton, implored Hillary's campaign to secure:  Early on, Mr. Clinton had pleaded with Robby Mook, Mrs. Clinton's campaign manager, to do more outreach with working-class white and rural voters. But his advice fell on deaf ears.  It wasn't just Bill Clinton:  Former Gov. Edward G. Rendell of Pennsylvania also said he had encouraged campaign aides at Mrs. Clinton's Brooklyn headquarters to spread their vast resources outside Philadelphia and Pittsburgh and focus on rural white pockets of the state. "We had the resources to do both," Mr. Rendell said Wednesday. "The campaign — and this was coming from Brooklyn — didn't want to do it."  The warning signs existed. Google Salena Zito and read the articles she wrote. She talked to people who vote Democrat all the time but considered voting for Trump. Obviously, many of them did, and Bill Clinton knew it was an issue. But Robby Mook didn't care.  As for James Comey, there is not a single shred of evidence to show any causation of lost support for Clinton due to his infamous letter. Thankfully, Josh Jordan (aka NumbersMuncher on Twitter) has
I love making jewelry from unconventional materials. So when I got the opportunity to make some jewelry out of zippers, I jumped on the chance.  The zippers for this tutorial are from K and C Supplies. You can find all sorts of colors and varieties of zippers in the online shop here. (Plus buttons! Oh, yes, there will be a button jewelry tutorial soon, too!)  Let's get started!  Materials and Tools:  3 – 7 inch YKK Zippers. Pick them up at K and C Supplies.  12 Fold over crimp ends. Available at any craft store.  7 mm jump rings  Lobster clasp  Scissors  Chain nose pliers and another pair of pliers  Optional materials for customizing your bracelet:  Beads  Head pins  Lucite flowers  Step #1  We're going to separate each zipper into 2 parts. So flip over the zipper and find the little metal throngs on the back. Just bend them up with chain nose pliers and pull it off.  Then just slide the pull down and off the zipper. (Definitely save this for other projects!)  ALTERNATIVELY (and this is easier, but you lose a little of the length of the zipper.)  Alternatively you can just cut across the zipper right above that little metal thing at the end. Like I mentioned, you will lose a some of the length of the zipper and ultimately your bracelet by doing that.  Repeat this for all 3 zippers. Whichever way you chose, do it the same for all of the zippers.  Step #2  Use scissors to cut along the side of the zipper teeth. You'll end up with a thin strand of just the teeth. (Save the excess for a project I will share later.)  Repeat for each zipper. You'll end up with 6 of these.  Step #3  Add a crimp end to each end of each zipper. Just place the end in the crimp end and fold over each side. Then push it closed.  HINT: I like to pull on the crimp end to make sure it's secure before moving on.  Step #4  Open 2 – 7mm jump rings.  Opening a jump ring may be different than you think. Line up 2 pairs of pliers so that the opening of the jump ring is in the middle.  (I usually use a pair of bent nose pliers and a pair of chain nose pliers. Use whatever pliers you feel comfortable with.)  Maintaining the integrity of the circle, pull one pair the the pliers toward you and the other away from you. Do not pull the circle apart and do not pull to the sides.  This is what you end up with.  To close a jump ring, just do the same, but the opposite.  I also made a video tutorial about how to properly open and close jump rings:  Step #5  Add the end of all 6 zippers to one jump ring. Then close the jump ring.  Step #6  Secure the end to something. (I used some wire and hooked it to a basket.)  Braid the zippers. I made 3 groups of 2 zippers each and just did a regular braid.  Step #7  Gather the other end and hook them all in another 7 mm jump ring.  Step #8  Open another 7 mm jump ring and connect the lobster clasp to one end of the bracelet. Then add a few 7 mm jump rings to the other end of the bracelet.  That's the basic zipper bracelet.  Here are some ways to customize it:  (Feel free to get creative here!)  Make a couple of bead dangles. I used flower beads.  For a video tutorial on how to make a bead dangle, here's a video I made:  Then add the dangles to the end of the bracelet using a jump ring.  Want to take it a step further?  Make some more bead dangles. Click here to learn how to make these dangles with Lucite flowers.  Add them to the bracelet in various places using jump rings. I used 4mm jump rings so the dangles would stay in place, but if you would like them to have some movement, use 7mm jump rings.  Another Version:  Instead of making a braided bracelet, you could make a single bracelet. These would look awesome stacked. Imagine a bunch of different colors down your arm. You can add a dangle like I did here, or just keep them plain.  Have fun making zipper bracelets! Let me know how they turn out!  ——————————————————————————————————————–  Want more free
Looks like D/N80 makes very high quality goods. I say "looks" because I never received mine. I ordered 2 straps in 2 wks & throughout 6 wks I pinged for Order Ack/status. After 4 wks, D/N80 emailed & said that the pieces were cut & need to be assembled. I asked if I could change my color if possible on one. Two wks later he canceled both with no explanation. I suspect he canceled because I had asked for the "possibility to change"; & in no way insisted the change. I was expecting he either say "no, can't do"; "yes, but you have to wait longer", or "yes, no problem"... but instead just a cancellation 2 wks later. Every business owner has the "right to refuse service"; its just a bummer that the "right" came after 6 weeks of waiting. 100% refund provided. Lesson: Let the artist due their art, & don't expect customer service
Between State and Anarchy:  A Model of Governance  by Fred E. Foldvary  School of Management  John F. Kennedy University  Anarchy & Liberty Seminar  Université du Québec à Hull  1. The moral basis for just governance  2. Communitarian democracy  3. Secession  4. Public finance  5. Geo-archism between anarchism and minarchism  1. The moral basis for just governance  The relationship between anarchy, liberty, and governance first requires an ethical basis from which to draw political and economic policy conclusions. John Locke provided the basic framework for an objective universal ethic. However, Locke did not provide a derivation. I will first provide a derivation for the universal ethic, based on my book The Soul of Liberty (1980), and then apply it to the question of proper governance.  In his Second Treatise (1947, p. 123), Locke stated:  "The state of nature has a law of nature to govern it which obliges every one; and reason, which is that law, teaches all mankind who will but consult it that, being all equal and independent, no one ought to harm another in his life, health, liberty, or possessions...."  This pithy statement summarizes the premises and contents of the Locke's natural law, which is the universal ethic that will be derived here. I define "morality" as "the assignment of moral values by an ethic." This concept can be expressed as:  V 7 e(A)  where A is an act performed by a person, e is some ethic, and V is one of the four moral values good, evil, neutral, and undetermined. The value V is assigned by the ethic e applied to act A. The issue at hand is whether there exists some universal ethic "u" which is independent of cultural and personal values despite the premise of subjective values, that all values only originate in individual interests and the culture of individuals.  Locke states, "and reason, which is that law". The universal ethic is derived using reason, and reason implies that it is a non-arbitrary, hence rational, ethic. But in order to derive such an ethic, we must be able to recognize it once we have concluded its rules. How will we know that we have achieved a rational, universal ethic? We need criteria.  Locke, in the statement quoted above, stated that "reason ... teaches all mankind" and that persons are "all equal and independent". The key word here is "all". The domain of the universal ethic (the "A" in the argument) must include all persons; it is universal in applying to all persons in all cultures and all times and places. This is the first criterion.  The universal ethic must also be "comprehensive," which means that all the acts of a person are included in its domain. Clearly, it would lose universality if any acts were excluded. Hence, all acts are included, and this forms the second criterion regarding the domain of the ethic.  There are also two criteria regarding the ethic itself. As Locke wrote, it is reason which teaches it to mankind; hence the ethic must be logically derived, its conclusion consistent with its premises.  Reason also requires that the premises themselves be non-arbitrary, not based on any personal or cultural views or values, or any authorities. This is the second criterion for the ethic itself, making four criteria in total: 1) universality regarding persons, 2) comprehensiveness regarding acts, 3) logical consistency, 4) non-arbitrary premises.  The ontological basis for the universal ethic, the basis for its existence, is that it uniquely fits the criteria. The acceptance of the criteria imply that if one can present an ethic that uniquely fits them, then that ethic is indeed the universal ethic. These criteria imply that, if it exists, the universal ethic must be unique. A second universal ethic must either have different and conflicting premises, or else its rules would be compatible with the first, enabling the two to be merged into one ethic. Hence, there can only be one set of consistent and universal moral rules.  The Premises of the Universal Ethic  Where, then, shall we obtain our premises for the derivation? I turn once again to Locke: "The state of nature has a law of nature". The "law of nature" is the "universal ethic". It is an "ethic of nature" existing in "the state of nature". What is this "nature"? Clearly, it is not the nature of the stars or the atoms, but the nature of what the ethic applies to: persons. The nature of human beings (and whichever other species may be "persons") is such that it contains or implies an ethic. The premises from which the universal ethic can be derived therefore regard human nature (
Source: http://www.prlog.org/11974488-human-rights-violations-in-childbirth.html  Women's human rights are being violated in childbirth, will things finally change? Things look promising. New documentary discussing childbirth as the most pressing global Human Rights issue premieres all over the world on Thursday September 20th.  FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  Freedom For Birth World Premiere  PRLog (Press Release) – Sep 13, 2012 –  Ottawa, Ontario – One needn't talk to many people to hear a childbirth horror story. The question Dr. Nancy Salgueiro asks is "Women are submitting to or being forced into procedures they do not want or need when giving birth. Why are women laying down and accepting the abuses happening in childbirth?"  Dr. Nancy Salgueiro, a leading expert in childbirth education and women's empowerment revealed, "There are women and babies being victimized and traumatized by abusive treatment and unnecessary medical interventions in birth."  Discussions with women who have experienced childbirth uncover:  • Women are given misleading information making them feel as if procedures are necessary when they are not.  • Women are being told they are incapable of birthing their own baby and must trust in system that does not support normal birth.  • Women are being forced to birth in institutions because of lack of access to birth attendants outside hospitals.  • Women are abused and assaulted by procedures done to their bodies without consent and even after consent is withdrawn.  • Women are being told they have no choices and must comply with medical orders or be threatened that their child may be taken from them.  The evidence is clear as to how to have a safe and gentle birth and yet the current birth climate is reflecting interventions not supported by research, record high rates of surgical births, and women experiencing post traumatic stress as a result of what has been termed "birth rape".  Human rights lawyers, film makers, and organizations like the Informed Choice Coalition are looking to change this.  Thursday, September 20, 2012 marks the world premier of the Freedom for Birth.  Freedom for Birth is a 60 minute documentary featuring a Who's Who of leading birth experts and international Human Rights lawyers all calling for radical change to the world's maternity systems.  Hermine Hayes-Klein, US lawyer and organiser of the recent Human Rights in Childbirth Conference at the Hague, the Netherlands says, "the way that childbirth is being managed in many countries around the world is deeply problematic. Millions of pregnant women are pushed into hospitals, pushed onto their back and cut open. They are subject to unnecessary pharmaceutical and surgical interventions that their care providers openly admit to imposing on them for reasons of finance and convenience. Women around the world are waking up to the fact that childbirth doesn't have to be like this and it shouldn't. Disrespect and abuse are not the necessary price of safety".  Freedom For Birth, made by British filmmakers Toni Harman and Alex Wakeford, tells the story of an Hungarian midwife Agnes Gereb. Ms Gereb has been jailed for supporting women who have chosen to give birth at home. Anna Ternovsky, a home birth mother supported by Ms Gereb decided to stand up for her right to choose the best birth for her baby.  When pregnant with her second child, Ternovsky took her country of Hungary to the European Court of Human Rights. This landmark trial was a victory for women and has major implications for childbirth around the world.  Toni Harman, one of the filmmakers says, "the Ternovsky vs Hungary ruling at the European Court of Human Rights in 2010 means that now in Europe, every birthing woman has the legal right to decide where and how she gives birth. And across the world, it means that if a woman feels like her Human Rights are being violated because her birth choices are not being fully supported, she could use the power of the law to protect those rights. With the release of "Freedom For Birth", we hope millions of women become aware of their legal rights and so our film has the potential to spark a revolution in maternity care across the world. In fact, we are calling this the Mothers' Revolution."
Ladies' Code were travelling back to Seoul when the accident occurred (Picture: Multi-Bits via Getty Images)  Ladies' Code singer RiSe is out of surgery but 'under careful observation' after sustaining serious injuries in the car accident that killed bandmate EunB.  The K-pop star had emergency brain surgery following the crash in the early hours of this morning, with reports in South Korea saying the operation lasted over nine hours.  The group's record label has now confirmed that RiSe is out of surgery, while the surviving members of the group are also being treated in hospital.  Sojung was operated on for a bone fracture, while Ashley and Zuny are being treated for shock.  Polaris Entertainment said in a statement: 'RiSe's long operation has ended and she's currently under careful observation. The other members are currently hospitalised in Seoul. Sojung underwent an operation for her bone fracture.  'Ashley and Zuny did not sustain major injuries, but because of the shock and trauma from the accident they are currently undergoing several examinations and treatment.'  Advertisement  Advertisement  The label also confirmed details of EunB's funeral, adding: 'EunB's remains are attended to at Korea University Anam Hospital. Her funeral will be held on the 5th.'  MORE: Ladies' Code singer EunB killed after South Korean pop group involved in car crash
2019 Simplot Games  The 41st annual Simplot Games will be held February 14-16, 2019, at Idaho State University's Holt Arena. The J.R. Simplot Company-sponsored event has become one of the nation's premier high school indoor track and field events since it was first held in 1979.  Although the 2,200 athletes from 19 different states, Canada, Australia and New Zealand who travel to Pocatello come to shine under Holt Arena's bright lights, the Simplot Games weekend itself is about more than just standing atop a podium.  Competitors get the chance to mingle with Olympic legends like Dick Fosbury (our chairman), Andre Phillips, Willie Banks, Stacy Dragila, and more. The Games also offers recognition for everyone with the Parade of Athletes, a truly Olympic-style event.  Simplot Games is unique because it is an open meet, which means athletes do not need a certain qualifying time or distance to be able to compete. Everyone is welcome at the Games allowing high school athletes from all over the chance to compete and have fun. It truly makes Simplot Games an extraordinary experience for everyone.   You can view video footage of Simplot Games on the web via RunnerSpace.com
Play 05:03 Play 05:03 Holding: Chanderpaul always did what was necessary  After more than two decades and 164 Test matches, Shivnarine Chanderpaul, one of West Indies' finest batsmen, has retired. Chanderpaul finishes as the second-highest West Indian Test run-maker, 86 runs short of Brian Lara: Lara got 11,953 (11,912 for West Indies and the rest for the ICC World XI), while Chanderpaul scored 11,867 (all for West Indies).  Chanderpaul, 41, had not played for West Indies since May 2015; the West Indies selectors dropped him after a weak performance during the three-Test series at home against England. While Chanderpaul entertained hopes of a comeback, the selection panel, headed by former West Indies captain Clive Lloyd, had provided enough hints that they had moved past Chanderpaul as they ignored him for the various series in the last eight months. Chanderpaul was also not part of the 15 players handed annual contracts by the WICB in December.  Last June Chanderpaul had said he would decide by the end of the year when he would exit the international scene. "Definitely, but I am on the outside, just waiting to see what is happening," Chanderpaul told cricket365.com, when asked if he wanted to play Tests again. "Retirement isn't on the cards at the moment. Not for now, probably the ending of the year maybe then."  That his desire to play on continued to be strong was evident from the fact that he remained part of the regional domestic tournaments and, in fact, played his last match just three days ago, in the semi-final of the Nagico Super50 one-day tournament for Guyana.  The WICB said in a release that Chanderpaul formally notified the board "in an email that he will no longer be available for selection for West Indies". "The WICB acknowledges the invaluable contribution Shiv has made to the game globally, and we wish him all the best," WICB president Dave Cameron said.  One big reason for Chanderpaul to re-think his international career could be his involvement with the Masters Champions League (MCL), a tournament for players who have left all professional forms of the game including domestic cricket, which begins on January 28 in Dubai. To participate in the MCL, players have to get no-objection certificates from their respective boards stating that they have retired from all forms of cricket. Incidentally, till Thursday the WICB had not been approached for an NOC by any player. Chanderpaul was signed for $30,000 to represent Gemini Arabians in the tournament.  Chanderpaul is only the second modern-day player, after Sachin Tendulkar, whose career stretched over two decades. He might not have been as celebrated and revered as Tendulkar, but Chanderpaul had worked hard, quietly, to become one of the strongest pillars of West Indies cricket.  He scored 30 Test centuries and averaged 51.37 in the format, and held numerous records that are likely to last for a long time, including batting for more than 25 hours in a Test series between dismissals - he did it against India in 2002, when he faced 1050 consecutive deliveries without losing his wicket.  Unorthodox stance and great determination aside, Chanderpaul never allowed his emotions to overpower him or pour over on the outside. Perhaps that reserved nature of his explained why he led West Indies only 14 times in Tests. He also played 268 ODIs for 8778 runs at 41.60 (the last of which was during the 2011 World Cup), and 22 T20Is.  Nagraj Gollapudi is an assistant editor at ESPNcricinfo  © ESPN Sports Media Ltd.
Pricing  INDIVIDUAL  1 year: $270  6 months: $140  3 months: $75  1 month: $25  No more than 3 names per box. Setup Fee $10 / Key Deposit $5  BUSINESS  1 year: $330  6 months: $170  3 months: $90  1 month: $30  No more than 5 names per box  TERMS
USA Born Professional Pool Player as seen on ESPN & SKY Sports.  World Champion – 10-foot table DCC 14.1 Championship 2013.  Tunica Pro Bank Pool & 14.1 Champion – 10-foot table. 2013  Pro 9-Ball Champion – Best In The West LA Invitational 2008.  Top 5 Pro Tour Mosconi Cup Ranking 2003 & 2004.  National Collegiate Champion ACU-I 8-Ball. 1993 & 1994.  National Junior BCA Champion, 8-Ball. 1991.  Hundreds of titles and exhibitions spanning 33 years.
These FAQs provide basic information and related resources for common food and nutrition questions. For personalized dietary advice, please talk to a qualified health care professional.   Where can I get information on the level of calories, fat, protein, vitamins and minerals in various foods?
Flame Spirit  Lvl. 1 Summons a Flame Spirit that supports attack for 10 seconds. (Attack power: 75, HP: 1000). Requires: Acquire 5 different wizards.  Class:  Wizard   Type:  Summons Lvl. 2 Summons a flame spirit that supports attack for 10 seconds. (Attack Power: 100, HP: 1500) Requires: Acquire Lost Mountain Girl.  Lvl. 3 Summons a flame spirit that supports attack for 10 seconds. When the party uses a chain-3, the spirit's attack is increased by 25%. (Attack Power: 175, HP: 2000) Requires: Acquire Lilith.  Lvl. 4 Summons a flame spirit that supports attack for 10 seconds. When the party uses a chain-3, the spirit's attack is increased by 25%. (Attack Power: 250, HP: 3500) Requires: Acquire 20 different wizards.
Tracking down suspects who target aircraft and risk temporarily blinding pilots with powerful, hand-held lasers is no longer a shot in the dark.  Thanks to improved cooperation and communication between a number of organizations — police, government transport officials and air navigation staff — responding to incidents has become the near equivalent of most other crimes.  article continues below  "It's now like responding to a bank robbery, a break and enter in progress or a similar call for assistance," said Sgt. Cam Kowalski of the Richmond RCMP which handles an average of 35 calls a year where aircraft coming into YVR have been hit by the intense light from a laser.  And that's no mean feat considering some of the lasers being used have a range of 100 miles or more — a capability that gives culprits the ability to set up and pin point aircraft from just about anywhere along the flightpath in the Lower Mainland.  "We're responding to calls from places like Garry Point here in Richmond, out to Burnaby and Port Coquitlam," said Kowalski who specializes in the field of visual interference with aircraft which is becoming more common as prices for powerful lasers make them more accessible.  "In the last 10 to 12 years there's been a dramatic increase in laser strikes globally, which includes YVR," Kowalski said. "What we've done is create a response protocol for laser strikes."  It's one now being used nationally with local law enforcement agencies racking up the best rate for arrest and conviction — four in the past six to eight months, Kowalski said.  "We've been able to close the (communication) loop between the actual aircraft on descent, to NAV Canada, E-Comm and the police in the jurisdiction affected," Kowalski said.  "So, everybody is aware and responds accordingly when a call comes in, giving it the seriousness it deserves."  Once police have been notified in the suspected community where the laser strike originated, the decision is made to employ a K-9 unit, or even task one of the RCMP's two helicopters to try and locate the suspect(s).  As to why someone would target an aircraft with a laser, Kowalski said some may see it as a form of entertainment, while if an intent to harm is present, that vaults the offence into more serious territory.  Those found guilty are subject to federal and provincial penalties under the criminal code, aeronautics act and Canadian aviation regulations, Kowalski said, adding the penalties can include a $1,000 fine and forfeiture of the laser.  "Under the criminal code we'd like to see a substantial increase in terms of jail time due to the seriousness of the matter," he added.  In the U.S., it can delve into charges of terrorism, Kowalski said, with one offender serving 14 years in prison.
Kendrick Perkins | Center | #21 Team: Cleveland Cavaliers Age / DOB: (33) / 11/10/1984 Ht / Wt: 6'10' / 270 College: None Drafted: 2003 / Rd. 1 (27) / MEM Share: Tweet  Latest News Recent News  The Cavs have waived Kendrick Perkins. Perkins was picked up during Cleveland's postseason run to serve as an emergency depth guy, but with the Cavs likely going into a rebuilding phase, there's no incentive to keep him around. Source: Adrian Wojnarowski on Twitter  The Cavs will pick up Kendrick Perkins' $2.5 million team option for 2018-19, with the intent of packaging him in a trade. Cleveland can still waive Perkins if he isn't traded, so this just gives them financial flexibility if they need to match salaries for a big fish. It's indicative of their desire to add a big-name player to lure LeBron James back to Cleveland. Source: ESPN.com  Kendrick Perkins got into a shouting match with Drake on the way to the locker room at halftime on Tuesday, and then got into another exchange of words with the rapper after the game. "What happened was I was talking to my old teammate Serge (Ibaka) walking into halftime telling him 'We about to win this game,' and Drake butted in talking [stuff] to me," Perkins texted to ESPN after the game. "So I said something back to him." In case you missed it, Perk is on the Cavaliers playoff roster, but wasn't active for tonight's game. Perkins' basketball game isn't worth much these days, but he's not a guy most human beings should be picking a fight with, in our opinion. Source: Ardrian Wojnarowski on Twitter
A pipe bomb strapped to a man went off in the New York City subway near Times Square on Monday, injuring him and three other people at the height of the morning rush hour, law enforcement officials said.  "Let's be clear, this was an attempted terrorist attack," New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio said.  Police said the explosion happened in an underground passageway under 42nd Street between 7th and 8th Avenues, with first responders notified around 7:20 a.m. ET. The blast filled the passageway, crowded with throngs of Monday morning commuters, with smoke.  Officials said a man transported an "improvised, low-tech" explosive device attached to his body and set it off. He suffered injuries, as did three people nearby.  EMS removed perpetrator to Bellevue Hospital. 3 people in proximity to the explosion removed themselves, all have minor injuries consistent with being in area of an explosion -<a href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/FDNY?src=hash&ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">#FDNY</a> Commissioner Nigro gives update on explosion at Port Authority —@FDNY  James O'Neill, NYPD commissioner, identified the suspect as Akayed Ullah, 27. He suffered lacerations and was transported to Bellevue Hospital.  The device was based on a pipe bomb and affixed with Velcro and zip ties.  'It was fairly orderly'  This undated photo provided by the New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission shows Akayed Ullah, the suspect in Monday's incident. (New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission via AP) Kelly said Ullah did make statements after the attempt, but would not specify any political motives or any affiliations or sympathies with militant groups.  Officials told The Associated Press that Ullah lives in Brooklyn and came to the U.S. from Bangladesh about seven years ago on an F-4 visa, a preferential visa available for those with family in the U.S. who are citizens or permanent residents. The officials spoke to AP on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak publicly about the blast.  White House spokesperson Sarah Huckabee Sanders said on Monday afternoon that the explosion shows the need for "immigration reform" and that Congress should work with the president, stressing the need to "protect our borders." Sanders also called for a "merit-based" immigration system, although it's not clear if that would have disqualified Ullah.  Ullah had been licensed to drive a livery cab between 2012 and 2015, according to the NYC Taxi and Limousine Commission, but let the licence lapse.  Ullah lived with his father, mother and brother in a residential area of Brooklyn with a large Bangladeshi community, neighbours said.  Alan Butrico owns the house next door and a locksmith business two doors down.  "It's very weird," he said. "You never know who your neighbours are."  Police stand guard inside the Port Authority Bus Terminal following an explosion near Times Square on Monday. (Andres Kudacki/Associated Press)  The Bangladesh Embassy in Washington condemned the attack. The deputy chief of mission, Mahbub Hassan Saleh, said the embassy had not received any information from authorities about the suspect.  'I was freaking out'  The incident was captured on transit system video, which investigators will analyze. They said they had not uncovered any additional plans or activities related to the bombing.  Elrana Peralta, a customer service worker for Greyhound, said she works in the Port Authority terminal complex near where the blast happened, but did not hear the explosion.  "All we could hear was the chaos," she said. "We could hear people yelling, 'Get out! Get out! Get out!"'  John Miles, 28, from Vermont, was waiting for a bus to Massachusetts. He also did not hear the blast, but saw police react.  "I didn't know what was going on. Officers were running around. I was freaking out," he said. There was an announcement that people should take their bags and leave. "They didn't incite panic. It was fairly orderly."  De Blasio also said there were no credible, specific threats to the city in general.  Gov. Andrew Cuomo praised law enforcement agencies and expressed gratitude the incident was not as life threatening as it could have been, given the time of the incident at the busy transportation node.  The Port Authority bus terminal was closed after the incident, but reopened about two hours later. Subway service was gradually being restored, and officials didn't anticipate any disruptions related to the incident for the late afternoon commute.
Insight Course: Lesson 14  Control of the Mind  The truth will set you free, but first it will piss you off. ~ Gloria Steinem  Are you ready for another wild trip down the rabbit hole? Now that we have explored our own deepest personal challenges, it is time to explore what is possibly the deepest challenge facing our planet.  The term "mind control" can bring up all kinds of thoughts and feelings. Yet as with almost any tool, mind control techniques can be used for the good of all of us or used to gain personal benefit at the expense of others.  Though this lesson may be the most disturbing of all for some, it is also vitally important as far as understanding how some of the top secret, sophisticated operations which have a major impact on our world have been carried out. This topic also has some amazing healing applications. These applications and the deeper implications of all this information will be discussed at the end of the lesson.  First, you are invited to explore some highly reliable information on how mind control has been used to forward hidden, disempowering agendas in our world. Please watch the revealing, 45-minute History Channel documentary Mind Control: America's Secret War at the link below:  https://www.WantToKnow.info/mindcontrolvideo  Some people would rather not know the many potentially disturbing facts about secret mind control programs used to manipulate people and politics around the world. Yet when we collectively choose not to know, those who are abusing these technologies are given free rein to explore further and to cause serious manipulations which lead to even more fear and polarization in our world.  By choosing to at least understand the basics of what is going on, we can come together to stop the destructive behavior and invite others to join us in working together for what's best for all on our planet. For the best concise summary of secret mind control programs, please read the two-page essay below:  https://www.WantToKnow.info/mindcontrol  Sacred Cows  Don't ignore the bad stuff, but make a point of celebrating the beautiful stuff with all the exuberant devotion you can muster.  ~ Rob Brezsny in his fun, profound book Pronoia is the Antidote for Paranoia   To Complete Insight Course Lesson 14: Click Here
A recent survey found that 67% of the Americans polled had a favorable view of Microsoft. It's too bad the question was so vague, I'd like to know if that same percentage trusts Microsoft without any reservations. In general, the coverage of the court findings in the Microsoft case have not mentioned any of the facts that led Judge Jackson to rule against Microsoft. So I thought it might be a good idea to go over some of the specific allegations against Microsoft that have been ignored in most discussions. Rather than going through them all, and there are plenty, I'll concentrate most on Microsoft's campaign to squash an one of their competitors in the early 1990's, Digital Research Inc. To set the scene, I'd like to take a stroll down memory lane. As someone who lived through this seemingly early phase in computer history, I am recalling this from memory, so bear with me. Back in the days when computers were not rated solely by MHz, but also by which Intel processor they had in them, a single office might have "286", "386" and "486" computers in them all at the same time. Windows 2.something was out, and it ran on top of DOS 4. At that time, basically the early 1990's, Windows was not a clear standard operating system. However, it was a step in the right direction, and it ran neatly on top of DOS (disk operating system), which was the operating system that all PCs used back then. IBM had a faltering version of DOS (IBM DOS), Microsoft has it's version (MS DOS), and a new star on the scene, Digital Research Inc., had come up with a new and improved version of DOS, known as DR DOS. The problem with DOS back then was the infamous 640Kb memory barrier, and how to use extended or expanded memory for applications larger than 640Kb. There was a heck of a lot of idle memory in PCs at that time, and people were looking for ways to use that extra memory, other than setting up a "RAM-drive". Digital Research was about to release a new version of DOS, "DR DOS 6", and Microsoft was very worried. According to Microsoft's own documents and internal email messages, DR DOS 5 was a superior product to their own upcoming "MS DOS 5", it was cheaper, and it would be out first. At that point, they began a campaign to flood the information channels with hype about MS DOS 5, and how it had advanced memory management, and was superior to all other products. This is standard business practice, but what followed, as outlined in Microsoft's own internal documents and memos, went far beyond that. Microsoft released MS DOS 5 in 1991 and Windows 3.1 in 1992. They were both big hits. DR DOS 6 was coming out, and was considered a superior product by many power users, and sold well. Then owners of DR DOS started getting error messages when they tried to install Windows 3.1 on their systems. It turns out that the developers of Windows were instructed to "make sure DR DOS has problems with Windows". The following are selected Microsoft emails that were entered into evidence in the trial. Microsoft's David Cole emailed Phil Barrett on September 30 1991: "It's pretty clear we need to make sure Windows 3.1 only runs on top of MS DOS or an OEM version of it," and "The approach we will take is to detect DR DOS 6 and refuse to load. The error message should be something like 'Invalid device driver interface." Microsoft had several methods of detecting and sabotaging DR-DOS with Windows. One was to have Smartdrive detect DR-DOS and refused to load it for Windows 3.1. There was also a version check in XMS in the Windows 3.1 setup program which produced the message: "The XMS driver you have installed is not compatible with Windows. You must remove it before setup can successfully install Windows." This was not true, but rather, was an attempt to undermine the competition. Brad Silverberg, the Microsoft exec who had been responsible for Windows 95, emailed Jim Allchin (now Senior Vice President of MS) on September 27th 1991: "after IBM announces support for dr-dos at comdex, it's a small step for them to also announce they will be selling netware lite, maybe sometime soon thereafter. but count on it. We don't know precisely what ibm is going to announce. my best hunch is that they will offer dr-dos as the preferred solution for 286, os 2 2.0 for 386. they will also probably continue to offer msdos at $165 (drdos for $99). drdos has problems running windows today, and I assume will have more problems in the future." Jim Allchin replied: "You should make sure it has problems in the future. :-)". Andy Hill emailed David Cole, Windows group manager: "Janine has brought up some good questions on how we handle the error messages that the users will get if they aren't using MS-DOS.
Are you ready for a Gambit origin story?  Channing Tatum takes centre stage in the new issue of Empire - out on Thursday, May 28 - with Magic Mike himself answering our queries in The Empire Interview. Some questions, as you may have suspected, concern his upcoming Gambit movie, one of the new standalones spinning off from Fox's X-Men universe.  "I love Gambit," says Tatum exclusively in Empire. "I grew up in the South; my father's from Louisiana. We'd go to New Orleans and I heard all the dialects. It felt so different from the rest of America; it has its own ancient culture. So I identified with that. And he always felt the most real of the X-Men to me. He's kind of a tortured soul and he's not a good guy. But he's not a bad guy, either. He walks his own path. And of course he plays cards and drinks and is a martial-arts badass!"  For those not already in the know, Marvel's official wiki describes the ragin' Cajun - real name Remy Etienne LeBeau - as a mutant with the power to... well, it's complicated.  "Gambit has the mutant ability to tap into the potential energy contained within an object and transform it into kinetic energy upon touching it," runs the wiki. "When Gambit thus charges an object and throws it at a target, the object releases this energy explosively on impact. Gambit is unable to use this power to charge living objects."  This explains all those pink cards he slings at his foes. What it doesn't explain is Taylor Kitsch's disappointing turn as the character in the equally disappointing X-Men Origins: Wolverine. It's still unclear whether the new script from RoboCop screenwriter Josh Zetumer will ignore his previous appearance in the X-verse.  "Josh Zetumer just turned in the first draft of the script, and it's killer," adds Tatum. "None of us were sure how he was going to deal with the X-Men world. But we're going to be changing some of the tropes of these movies. It's always about saving the world (laughs), but maybe we're going to shift things a liittle but. There's so many ways you can take [an origin story]. You could do it like Batman Begins, or a different take and go the Guardians Of The Galaxy route. All I can say is, I'm super excited."  Finding a unique way to save the world in a comic-book superhero movie is an increasingly big ask, but with the man who helped bring the Jump Street fanchise to life - and brought a whole new angle to Superman for The Lego Movie - at the helm, things are looking positive.  With no director officially attached, the Gambit movie is set for an October 7, 2016 release.
All eyes are on Colorado to see whether the special session ordered by Gov. John Hickenlooper will push the state to join five others that have legalized civil unions. If party lines hold the same weight they did last year when a similar bill died then the bill may be short-lived, but Colorado's legislature this year has exhibited some surprises.  The bill has already passed three Republican-led House committees with the help of one Republican vote to propel it forward. By comparison, last year's civil unions bill died in its first committee hearing on a party-line vote.  Monday afternoon State House Speaker Frank McNulty, R-Highlands Ranch assigned the civil unions bill to the House State, Veterans and Military Affairs Committee where it is being widely speculated it will die. There are nine members on the committee, three of whom have already voted "no" upon hearing the bill in committees last week.  On the second to last day of the session, Republicans denied they were filibustering but never got to the bill.  From the Colorado Independent:  Republicans had been denying for hours that they were filibustering, even as Rep. Bob Gardner, R-Colorado Springs, read whole sections of text into the record, calling out punctuation marks, and Rep. David Balmer, R-Centennial, railed theatrically about how school lunch regulations amounted to a step on the road to Nazism. "Why, you ask, why do I go on like this about a small amendment?" Gardner said winkingly at one point during a speech on the school lunch bill. "Because it's a small amendment but a large issue."  For its fourth committee hearing, the bill will again need just one Republican vote to make it to the House floor where House Democratic leader Mark Ferrandino estimates it will pass with between six to 10 Republican votes.  "Gov. Hickenlooper's special session will not result in one more job being created, or making gasoline any cheaper," McNulty told reporters before the start of the special session. "Unlike President Obama, Gov. Hickenlooper and their campaign operatives, Colorado families aren't preoccupied with promoting a divisive social agenda -- because they have more pressing concerns."  During his address, McNulty again chose to call the bill "same-sex marriage" rather than "civil unions."  McNulty also said that he assigned the bill to the State Veterans and Military Affairs Committee to push the special session to end Wednesday, alleging that the governor is spending taxpayer dollars on a President Barack Obama-backed "campaign stunt."  Ferrandino, however, is calling it a "kill committee."  "The majority, including 46 percent of Republican delegates to the party convention this year have supported this bill. This is not a controversial issue here. He sent it to the kill committee. It should have followed the same process as it followed during the regular session."  What Tweeters are saying:
Just like the countless innovators, explorers and fine people killed in a Frankensteinian way by their own inventions, the current owner of Segway—not Dean Kamen—died yesterday after he rode off a cliff and into a river in England.  Jimi Heselden, aged 62, was found at 11.40am yesterday by the River Wharfe in North Yorkshire, with his X2 Adventure (pictured) by his side. Police believe that it was just a freak accident, with nothing suspicious about the man worth $262m falling to his death.  Advertisement  It's particularly poignant as his company had only just purchased the Segway company in December 2009. He sounded like a really nice guy according to reports, a chap who left school at 15 to work in the mines, but was fortunate enough to develop some interesting-sounding defense systems which made him millions.  He was one of those rare philanthropists who had given away millions to charity but didn't like to talk about it—at least £23m ($36m) in the last few years alone, it's thought. [The Independent and The Daily Mail]  Image Credit: Scottslone
[ previous ] [ Contents ] [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ next ]  dselect Documentation for Beginners (Obsolete Documentation)   Abstract  This document contains is a short tutorial for first-time users of dselect , console Debian package handling frontend. It supplements the Installation Manual for Debian GNU/Linux 3.0 .  Contents  [ previous ] [ Contents ] [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ next ]  dselect Documentation for Beginners (Obsolete Documentation)
A local council has stopped a woman from laying a wreath of white poppies at a Remembrance Day service, insisting only red poppies will be allowed.  Lyn Pardo, a local historian from Chesterfield, Derbyshire, said she had laid a wreath of white poppies at the service previously, but has been stopped from doing so this year by Chesterfield Borough Council.  The Peace Pledge Union (PPU) and similar groups, who promote and sell the white poppy, claim to be "pacifists" who want to remember all victims of war.  Critics, however, told Breitbart London that they are associated with "anti-nationalism" and divert money from veterans which is spent on attempting to "re-write history" instead.  "Remembrance Day used to be about raising money," Mrs. Pardo told the Derbyshire Times. "Now it has a different slant. It is much more about glorification I feel."  "They [The council] said we were welcome to have our own little ceremony but we weren't allowed to take part in the main service."  Councillor Tricia Gilby, Chesterfield Borough Council's leader, said they had given "careful consideration to the request from the Chesterfield Pro-Peace Group".  However, they decided white poppies were not "appropriate on this occasion" and offered the chance to use white poppies at an "alternative wreath-laying ceremony".  "The wreath-laying ceremony [is] held in the spirit of thanksgiving to those who fought and gave their lives in conflict," he added.  'When you go home, tell them of us and say: For their tomorrow, we gave our today' https://t.co/hjADPVUUdR — Breitbart London (@BreitbartLondon) November 2, 2017  Trevor Coult, a veteran who has been awarded the Military Cross, explained to Breitbart London: "The red poppy stands for sacrifice, the money raised goes to families affected by conflict.  "The white poppy stands for anti-nationalism, and the money raised goes into re-education and re-writing history.  "If people want to wear it, that's their right because servicemen have died to give them that, but it's taking away much-needed funds which should be going to families that have been affected by conflict. "  Colonel Richard Kemp, the former commander of the British Forces in Afghanistan, recently echoed these sentiments when criticising teachers working with the PPU to "indoctrinate" school children.  He claimed the white poppy is linked to "left-wing ideology", adding:  "The [red] poppy is not a political hobby horse; it is a means of raising money for the welfare of soldiers and for the families of soldiers who have been killed, it has a specific purpose which is not political.  "The red poppy should be respected as opposed to another fringe political movement."
This brave video has been making the rounds. Meet Debi Jackson, a "conservative, Southern Baptist Republican from Alabama," who speaks of her experience of coming to terms with her 6-year-old child's gender identity. Her child was born a biological male and insisted on being recognized as a girl for most of her young life. And she's okay with that. She wants you to be, too.  "My daughter is a girl in her heart. She knows it. God knows it. And that's good enough for me."  [youtube]https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-oIuw3yIyhI[/youtube]
The actual number of girls are missing from the northeast Nigerian school attacked last week is 234, significantly more than the 85 reported by education officials, parents have told the state governor.  The higher figure came out on Monday, a week after the kidnappings when the Borno state governor insisted a military escort take him to the town, AP news agency reported.  Parents told the governor that officials would not listen to them when they drew up their list of names of missing children, reaching 234.  The discrepancy in the figures could not immediately be resolved.  The kidnappings are believed to have been carried out by Nigeria's Islamic rebels, Boko Haram, which has been violently campaigning to establish an Islamic Shariah state in Nigeri  Security officials had warned Governor Kashim Shettima that it was too dangerous for him to drive to Chibok, 130 kilometres from Maiduguri, the Borno state capital.  Borno state education commission Musa Inuwo Kubo and the principal of the Chibok Government Girls Secondary School had initially said 129 science students were at the school to write a physics exam when the abductors struck, after midnight on April 14.  Twenty-eight pupils escaped from their captors between Tuesday and Friday. Then another 16 were found to be day scholars who had returned to their homes in Chibok before the attack, leaving 85 missing students, according to school officials.  No rescue  The latest confusion of numbers comes after the military had reported last week that all but eight of those abducted had been rescued but then retracted the claim the following day.  Security sources have said they are in "hot pursuit" of the abductors, but so far they have not rescued any of the girls, aged between 16 and 18.  Parents and other town residents have joined the search for the students in the Sambisa Forest which borders Chibok town and is a known hideout for the fighters suspected of the abduction.
VATICAN CITY (Reuters) - Roman Catholicism faces a serious challenge from the rising number of people who believe in God but no longer see any need for a church, according to New York Cardinal Timothy Dolan.  Cardinal Timothy Dolan, the Archbishop of New York, looks at the helicopter (not pictured) carrying Pope Benedict XVI fly off from the Vatican, on its way to the papal summer residence at Castelgandolfo, February 28, 2013. REUTERS/Yara Nardi  Opinion research shows that some people today have problems "with the very nature and meaning of the church", Dolan, in Rome to prepare for a conclave to elect a replacement to the retired Pope Benedict, told Reuters in an interview.  Dolan said this trend, which sociologists of religion call "believing without belonging", should be high on the list of issues that cardinals discuss at the Vatican next week before they retreat into the Sistine Chapel to vote for the pope.  Benedict officially stepped down on Thursday, the first pope in almost six centuries to do so, and the 115 cardinals due to pick his successor began informal meetings on Friday to discuss procedures for the vote and size up candidates.  "We hear that more and more people have absolutely no problem with faith, but they do with religion," Dolan, 63 and mentioned among possible candidates for the papacy, said.  "While more and more people have no problem at all with Jesus Christ, they love him and accept him as their Lord and saviour, they do have problems with the church," he said. "More and more people don't see the need for the church."  The phrase "believing without belonging", coined by British sociologist Grace Davie in the 1990s, describes the growing number of people who say they are "spiritual but not religious" and leave organised religion behind.  The trend, seen in Europe and North America, has especially hurt established Christian churches that have seen their ranks dwindle.  In the United States, the "nones" - people with no religious affiliation - have grown from seven to 18 percent of the population since 1972, according to a Pew Forum study.  A third of those born after 1980 are unaffiliated, it said, compared to 15 percent among their "baby boom" parents and five percent in their grandparents' generation.  Dolan noted this and other studies showed most Catholics did not abandon the "faith of their fathers", but the church could not ignore the trend. "It is a problem," he said.  For Catholics, he said, faith in and love of Jesus Christ have always been linked with being part of the church.  "The two were a package deal - you don't have one without the other," he said. "We have to reclaim that lustre. We have to reclaim that relationship that Jesus and his church are one."  RELIGIOUS PERSECUTION  The New York archbishop said the Catholic Church, which with 1.2 billion faithful is by far the world's largest church, should also become more active in fighting religious persecution against people of all faiths around the globe.  At a recent synod of bishops to discuss Church efforts to revive Catholicism's missionary spirit, he said, several bishops suggested the Vatican create a separate office to monitor violations of religious liberty around the world.  "If people are persecuted anywhere for their religious belief, they should be able to look to the Catholic Church as a major defender," he said.  Dolan, who has led opposition to the Obama administration's healthcare mandate requiring religious institutions to provide birth control in their health plans, said this office should also monitor violations that "take place not in Third World countries but in First World countries".  "There seems to be a pretty well oiled choreography to reduce religion and faith to the excessively private and where religion may have absolutely no public witness and voice in the public square," he said.  "That's another subtle form of religious persecution."  Reform of the Curia, whose mismanagement has become a pressing issue before the conclave, must be considered but "I don't think we need to get overly obsessed with that," he said.  Dolan has joked that anyone who lists him among potential popes "must have been smoking marijuana", and laughed off talk in Rome that he could emerge from the Sistine Chapel in white papal robes.  "I don't know what other way to say I find that extraordinarily unlikely," he declared.
Story highlights Cleanthony Early was robbed around 4:30 a.m. Wednesday, police said  The forward didn't see much playing time this year  (CNN) The New York Knicks' Cleanthony Early was robbed and shot Wednesday morning in Queens, police said.  Early was shot once in the left leg and was taken to Elmhurst Hospital Center in stable condition, authorities said.  Based on preliminary information, police said it appeared Early had just left a gentleman's club around 4:30 a.m. when three vehicles surrounded the taxi he was in and a group of people -- at least one of whom was armed -- ordered him to get out of the vehicle.  The Knicks' Cleanthony Early.  Early handed over his gold chains before he was shot, police said.  Read More
Only a series of images, a bit lurid entitled as " Stalin's Rope Roads ", called my attention to the mining town of Chiatura in Imereti. It was immediately clear that one must see this once with own eyes. The small town is situated off the Georgian transport routes from east to west. From Zestaponi to Chiatura one needs about an hour by marshrutka. The town is located in a mountain valley on the banks of the Qvirila River. Because of its unusual location, crammed in the valley, the manganese mines are situated on the surrounding hills, the main transport is the ropeway. In the past there were several dozens ropeways, still most of them go as before – in its original unaltered condition.
ACTIVATE™ integrates brain, body, and social interventions to develop focus, self-control and memory skills necessary for success in school and life.  Some video games for kids actually weaken their ability to sustain attention – while ACTIVATE™ strengthens the child's own ability to sustain their attention. Our unique brain training software program not only recognizes when the child makes an error, it figures out why and coaches the children in real time how to improve their thinking strategies. Additionally, the ACTIVATE™ physical exercise program has been scientifically designed to increase neuroplasticity and exercise the same cognitive skills as the computer program. And with the easy, fast assessments of cognitive health based on the National Institutes of Health Toolbox (NIH Toolbox), ACTIVATE™ provides an early assessment of a child's special needs and abilities.  By using our unique "cross training" approach to brain training that combines computer and physical exercise, you'll see dramatic improvements in cognitive skills leading to increased real-life academic performance.
RIO DE JANEIRO — They don't make as much money as their counterparts of the opposite sex. They don't receive as much TV airtime or media coverage. They don't attract as many fans to arenas or as many followers on social media.  This sounds like a typical gender inequality story in American sports except for one thing: In gymnastics, the men are less popular than the women.  The chasm has only widened at the Rio Olympics as the U.S. women have dominated and the U.S. men have faltered. Whereas the American women waltzed to victory in the team competition and appear poised to capture two more medals in the all-around Thursday, their male counterparts finished a distant fifth as a team and didn't sniff the medal stand in Wednesday's all-around.  "It's absolutely frustrating that it's not equal, but I think it's about winning," said U.S. Olympian Chris Brooks. "The women have a wonderful track record of producing champions and medals over and over again. Companies want to be involved with champions and medal winners. If we're going to complain about it, we also have to do better."  While more success on an Olympic stage would certainly narrow the popularity gap for the American men, sports marketers remain unconvinced it would close altogether. They're skeptical a gold medal-winning men's gymnast could ever attract the same caliber sponsorships or endorsements past female champions have.  View photos Chris Brooks competes on the horizontal bar during the men's individual all-around. (Getty) More  By the morning after the all-around competition at the 2012 Olympics, champion Gabby Douglas had already gained 200,000 Twitter followers and received props from the likes of Oprah Winfrey, Lil Wayne and Nicki Minaj. Douglas would later grace cereal boxes and magazine covers, make the rounds on the talk show circuit and even star in her own reality TV series.  By contrast, American male gymnasts who win Olympic medals seldom become household names. Danell Leyva, the bronze medalist in the 2012 all-around competition, reportedly still lives at home with his mother and stepfather. Jonathan Horton, the top performer on the U.S. bronze-medal-winning team in 2008, told the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette two years ago that he receives 10 times more recognition for appearing on the show "American Ninja Warrior" than anything related to gymnastics.  "The women's combination of athleticism, youthfulness and feminism seems to grant them a broader demographic appeal in America," said Bob Dorfman, executive director of San Francisco-based Baker Street Advertising.  "Women admire and respect them, men love watching them, boys want to date them, young girls want to be them. And with the must-see Olympics attracting a wider audience than any other sporting event outside of the Super Bowl, it easily makes these athletes household names and faces, attracting a wide array of sponsors."  There are several factors that contributed to American female gymnasts overtaking their male counterparts in popularity during the 1970s.  [Related: 'Brazilian boyfriend' of Simone Biles enjoys own time in Olympic spotlight]  The introduction of Title IX in 1972 created more opportunities for female gymnasts at the college level and began the gradual process of cash-strapped athletic departments axing their men's programs. A new generation of female gymnasts also began appearing about that same time, younger and more petite than their predecessors.  When 14-year-old Romanian gymnast Nadia Comaneci won three gold medals in 1976 and became the first female to score a perfect 10, she quickly became the darling of that Olympics. Young girls identified with Comaneci's small stature, vibrant personality and remarkable athleticism. Parents began enrolling toddlers in tumbling classes and more gymnastics clubs began popping up nationwide to satisfy the growing demand.  Story Continues
We are a family farm near Peaceful Bay WA. We produce mainly grassfed calves for the Australian market from Angus/Friesian mothers and Simmental bulls and we also grow purple striped Italian garlic on compost enriched soils with no chemical sprays. The garlic is smaller this year due to the weather but still tastes good and we really enjoy growing it. It is delicious as whole bulbs added to roasts and with its strong flavour enhances many other dishes.  Read
"There were those that said I should have gone with the federal charges only," Garfield County Attorney Barry Huntington said in a news release Thursday. "But that would have meant Glosson would be out in 15 years, and I wanted to make certain that would never happen."
The wheels touched down and Wray awoke with a jerk. Where was he? Cleveland? Pittsburgh? Buffalo? Did it matter? Bobbie had booked him on a 6 week "tour of the Rust Belt". 6 weeks, 6 cons with comic store appearances in between. 5 weeks in and he was starting to feel more frayed than ususal and the plane was the first real sleep he'd gotten in all that time. 2 more cons and he could go home.  "Welcome to sunny Pittsburgh" , droned the pilot as the late February rain started. It was gonna be a long ride to the convention center. Why did his crotch feel so cold? It was then Wray realized that the passenger next to him had also fallen asleep and in the process had spilt coffee down Wray's pants. How did he sleep through that?! Welcome to sunny Pittsburgh.  At least getting the rental car and the drive to the convention center had been uneventful. He had to admit it stung a bit that the banners hung for the Con annouced guests like Patrick Stewart, Chris Evans, and Oscar Issac with bold colors and fonts and his own name as reduced to a "also featuring". At this point he just wanted to get into his room, change his stained pants, and take a nap before all the craziness began.  Wray had just managed to get into the hotel room and set his things down when the door flew open. In the door way stood a voice actor cum con lothario and the one of Wray's closest friends on the con circut.  "Ha! Wray peed his pants!", boomed Jerry Lansing. "What's the matter did little Wray-Wray get all scared?" Jarry half-tackled half-hugged Wray the way big bothers or golden retrievers do. Crashing both of them on the bed.  "Dammit, Jerry. Get off of me. I didn't pee my pants and IF I had peed my pants now it's all over you."  Jerry let up and held his hands to his nose. He took a deep breath in and considered the smell, "Eh. I've done weirder. "  "Get OFF!" Wray shoved Jerry as hard as he could. The baritoned-voice actor took the hint and let Wray up.  "Aww. What's the matter, buddy?"  "Nothing. It's this weather. The flight. "  "…that you peed your pants."  "I DIDN'T PEE MY PANTS, JERRY!"  "I know. Look, you were a sad sack back in Detroit. So I called in a favor with the 501st. We're gonna get your groove back!"  "I'm not a middle-aged woman that needs to be romanced by Taye Diggs! I don't need my groove back. I have plenty of groove! I am groove-ful!"  Jerry cocked his head and looked at Wray in a away that said, "Can you hear yourself speak?"  "OK, maybe I could use a little groove."  A grin split Jerry's face. "My MAN!", Jerry near-shouted. Arms wide, he backed toward the closet, "You and I are going", with a florish he threw open the closet door revealing a pair of Storm Trooper costumes, "incognito!"  Wray sighed to himself, " I have a really bad feeling about this." Then Wray realized something, "How did you get those into my hotel room closet?"
franczyk wrote:  Ho.. lee... smokes...   That's amazing. thank you for adding tremendous value to this community.  eapeas wrote:  Yeah, you have my interest now...keep us updated how they turn out!  BakeliteTM wrote:  Can you post a picture of the ships in a lock? How do they fit?
n.  1809, American English, from dough + nut (n.), probably on the notion of being a small round lump (the holes came later, first mentioned c.1861). First recorded by Washington Irving, who described them as "balls of sweetened dough, fried in hog's fat, and called doughnuts, or olykoeks." Earlier name for it was dough-boy (1680s). Bartlett (1848) meanwhile lists doughnuts and crullers among the types of olycokes, a word he derives from Dutch olikoek, literally "oil-cake," to indicate a cake fried in lard.  The ladies of Augusta, Maine, set in operation and carried out a novel idea, namely, the distribution of over fifty bushels of doughnuts to the Third volunteer regiment of that State. A procession of ladies, headed by music, passed between double lines of troops, who presented arms, and were afterwards drawn up in hollow square to receive from tender and gracious hands the welcome doughnation . [Frazar Kirkland, "Anecdotes of the Rebellion," 1866]  Meaning "a driving in tight circles" is U.S. slang, 1981. Cf. also donut.
On November 26, MOMOLAND's Nayun was hospitalized shortly after the group's performance on MBC's "Music Core" while on the way to their next schedule.  The rookie girl group was traveling to perform at the WebTV Asia Awards 2016 held at the Korea International Exhibition Center in Ilsan District, Goyang, when Nayun complained about feeling abdominal pain.  Their agency Duble Kick Company stated, "She was immediately taken to a hospital and is currently resting there after a thorough medical examination. As of now, we are waiting for the results of her examination to come out."  Subsequently, MOMOLAND performed at WebTV Asia Awards 2016 with the remaining 6 members.  We send Nayun our warm wishes!  Source (1)
Tweet Ever wanted a full DBLP database file containing all publication information for a given author (presumably yourself)? DBLP is a computer science bibliography database. Journals tracked on this site include VLDB, the IEEE Transactions, the ACM Transactions, and conference data. I've put together a dblp2bibtex utility, written in Haskell, that enables authors to download all publication data from DBLP, for a given author. It's open source on GitHub. Usage:  dblp2bibtex [OPTIONS]  A Haskell utility to generate bibtex files for an author identified with a DBLP URI Common flags:  -g --generatebibtex=Author URI Get bibtex file for given URI  -s --search=Author name Search for URI by name (e.g. "Joe Bloggs")  -l --listpapers=Author URI List papers for an author URI  -o --outfile=Bibtex filename (default 'export.bib')  -x --xref Include cross reference entries  -h --help Display help message  -v --version Print version information  For an example of use, and instructions on how to download and install, see this README on the GitHub page. Any problems, feedaback.. or pull requests then get in touch!  ReadMore By Rob in Uncategorized  Tweet I've updated my hobby project over the Christmas holidays. It combines my enjoyment for cycling in and around Scotland, with my addiction to Haskell programming. The source code is on Git Hub, here The main changes from the previous release include: Generating Open Street Map images with the GPS track overlays is now much quicker  Added runtime flags to generate tar archives for the generated web content  Bug fixes To install and use the software, you first of all need the haskell-platform, and then cairo, GraphcsMagick and gtk2hs-buildtools. For example, on Fedora Linux: $# yum install haskell-platform GraphicsMagick cairo gtk2hs-buildtools Then… $ cabal update $ cabal install gps2htmlReport $ gps2HtmlReport --help gps2HtmlReport [OPTIONS] A Haskell utility to generate HTML page reports of GPS Tracks and Track overlays on OpenStreetMap tiles Common flags: -i --imageonly Generates only an image of the track overlay on an OpenStreetMap layer -a --archive Produce tar archive for web and image files --hashnames Create reports in hashed directory names -h --help Display help message -v --version Print version information -V --Verbose Loud verbosity -q --quiet Quiet verbosity  Tweet Connected web of semantic content The semantic web is not the "future", it is the now. Semantic web technologies have matured in recent years, at the rapid rate in which enriched web content has emerged on the linked open data cloud. Take a look, http://richard.cyganiak.de/2007/10/lod/imagemap.html ! Whatever language you choose to adopt, you can be sure that they'll be a feature rich semantic web library to match. I can vouch for RDF4H [1] for Haskell and Jena [2] for Java. Why the need for embedded semantics? Firstly, to understand embedded RDFa, one should appreciate the value in semantics on the web. Why have many organizations (including the BBC [3] and the British Library [4]) invested a lot of time semantizing existing web content and data? Simply put, from the very beginning of the World Wide Web, it has been a connected network of human readable documents, largely made up of documents written in the markup language – HTML. We've been able to learn from one another, distribute information to wide audiences, and read weather reports for our respective regions of the world. The problem Web 1.0 and Web 2.0 are both broadly defined as a connected network of human readable resources. Given two blog posts on two separate webpages, how do I discover whether they discuss similar or identical concepts? I have to read them and check! Isn't this all a bit cumbersome?! How do people make discoveries on the web… Search for text in one's favourite search engine? When I'm enthralled by an entertaining blog post, how do I find other posts that touch on how to start a blog, or by the same author, or posted within the last month etc… The Solution? RDF + Ontology Reuse! Read the rest of this entry »  ReadMore By Rob in Uncategorized  Tweet I've recently encountered a need transform named graphs expressed in RDF, into sparql update requests… with the ultimate goal of autonomously pushing named graphs into rdf stores via a sparql endpoint. Read the
Midnight Drive-Thru is a pop culture podcast and streams live every week on Mixlr.com/midnightdrive_thru. Read Less  Midnight Drive-Thru is a pop culture podcast and streams live every week on Mixlr.com/midnightdrive_thru. Read more »  Most Recent Episode  ...And We're Back (Episode 57)  Aug 10, 2017 · 8 minutes  Traves drops by with a quick update on the status of MNDT and where the show is headed in the future. That's right, MNDT is back!  Traves drops by with a quick update on the status of MNDT and where the show is headed in the future. That's right, MNDT is back! Read less
Missouri Attorney General Josh Hawley says he has rented an apartment in Jefferson City, to end accusations from Democrats that he has been violating state law by commuting from his home in Columbia.  At issue is a phrase in state law that requires the Missouri attorney general to reside "at the seat of government."  Hawley, a Republican, reiterated Thursday to St. Louis Public Radio that he and his legal team remain convinced he was not breaking any laws, and that Columbia was close enough. He accused Democrats of conducting "a sideshow issue'' to distract from more important matters.  To put the issue to rest, Hawley said, "I have decided to call the Democrats' bluff on this," renting a two-bedroom apartment within the Jefferson City limits. He said he plans on using the apartment when he is working late, but the quarters is large enough that his wife and two children can also stay there.  "I will stay there as needed to make it a true personal residence (for legal purposes,)" Hawley said.  He emphasized that his primary home will remain in Columbia, which he added "is 17 minutes away'' from his office.  Hawley's predecessor, Democrat Chris Koster, had apartments in Jefferson City and St. Louis.  Assistant House Minority Leader Gina Mitten, D-St. Louis, replied in a statement: "… Hawley said he 'decided to call Democrats' bluff on this.' Hawley has it backwards. He claimed for weeks that the law didn't apply to him but now he's complying with it. Somebody blinked here, and it wasn't us."  Attorney general revamps, replaces staff  All of the senior staff in the attorney general's office has been replaced, Hawley said. Koster had retained many people who'd worked for fellow Democrat and the former attorney general, Jay Nixon.  Hawley also said he has revamped operations to set up a new "federalism unit'' that focuses on federal and regulatory issues. John Sauer will head that unit, in addition to being Hawley's top staff assistant. Sauer's new title is "state solicitor general."  Sauer previously had been a clerk for the late Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia.  Hawley said he is hiring several other lawyers for the unit, as well as for other operations in the attorney general's office.  "We have replaced all of the senior leadership,'' Hawley said.  The federal unit is overseeing three major federal suits filed so far to challenge federal regulations or mandates that affect Missouri. A number of sections have been merged so that the office now will have two legal divisions — civil and criminal. Darrell Moore, the veteran Greene County prosecutor, will oversee the criminal division, Hawley said.  Follow Jo on Twitter: @jmannies
Malky Mackay  Malky Mackay is Sky Bet's odds-on favourite to succeed Tony Pulis as Crystal Palace manager.  Pulis quit on Thursday night – just two days before the start of the new season – following crisis talks with co-chairman Steve Parish, leaving Palace searching for a successor.  Mackay, who took Cardiff into the Premier League before being sacked last December, told Sky Sports News HQ earlier this week that he was looking to get back into management – with the right club.  Gary Cotterill reports from Crystal Palace's training ground as the Eagles prepare to find a replacement for Tony Pulis Gary Cotterill reports from Crystal Palace's training ground as the Eagles prepare to find a replacement for Tony Pulis  "At the moment I'm just waiting," he said. "I had a couple of opportunities in the summer that I didn't feel I was ready for.  "So it's really just a question of wait and see – but I really want to get back into it and manage again.  "I really enjoyed the challenge of coaching against some of the top coaches in the world and pitting your wits against them.  "Everyone would love to manage in the Premier League – but there are only so many clubs – I certainly enjoyed it last year and I would love to have the chance to manage there again."  If Mackay joins Crystal Palace, he will be reunited with his former head of recruitment at Cardiff - Iain Moody.  Moody was appointed sporting director at Selhurst Park last year after also being sacked by Cardiff, and he had previously worked alongside Mackay at Watford.  PALACE CONTENDERS We look at the candidates to succeed Tony Pulis. MALKY MACKAY Out of football since leaving Cardiff last season, Mackay is highly rated by many in the game and has close ties to Palace sporting director Iain Moody. NEIL LENNON Former Celtic manager Lennon is keen to land a top job in England. After winning three successive Scottish league titles, the Selhurst Park job would be an entirely different kind of challenge. DAVID MOYES Could the former Everton and Manchester United boss be tempted by a swift Premier League return? The Scot may bide his time in anticipation of a bigger club coming in, so it looks a long shot. KEITH MILLEN The former Bristol City manager has been serving as number two to Pulis. Has no Premier League management experience so it would be a gamble were Palace to plump for the 47-year-old. TIM SHERWOOD Cut his teeth as a manager at Tottenham last season, and was certainly not afraid of speaking his mind, which rubbed some up the wrong way. He is keen to get back into work and at the top level.  Sky Bet have slashed the odds on Crystal Palace being relegated following the departure of Pulis.  The former Stoke boss oversaw a remarkable turnaround after being appointed in November, defying odds of 1/20 for relegation to lead them to an 11th-place finish.  Sky Bet football trader Jamie Munro said: "Crystal Palace looked doomed when Pulis took charge last season and with little improvement to the squad we fear for them again now.  "We started to see backing for Tony Pulis to be the first manager to go on Thursday morning, which came as a major shock as he was initially a 40/1 outsider in the market, which has been followed by money on the Eagles to be relegated."  Palace have been linked with a move to bring their former winger Wilfried Zaha back to Selhurst Park after a difficult first year at Manchester United.  Speaking to Sky Sports News on Tuesday, Parish insisted that Pulis would be given all the support he needed to build the squad he wants.  "It's up to the manager, the players we sign. It's not up to me. I'm there to help him get the squad he wants," Parish said.  "There's a sentimental value and I loved Wilf as a kid and he did sensational things for us.  "I know the fans would like him back and that will play a part, but in the end the manager will decide what we do."  There has been surprise on social media to Pulis' Palace exit with West Ham co-owner David Gold tweeting: "Tony Pulis leaves Crystal Palace only hours before the start of the season. Hard to believe."  QPR defender Rio Ferdinand added: "Wow. Tony Pulis gone... management swings and roundabouts started earlier" while Tony Pulis' son Anthony - a player in the Major Soccer League - tweeted "right I'm off to get the guest room ready."  Watch Crystal Palace face Arsenal in the Premier League live on Sky Sports 1 HD on Saturday. The programme starts at 4:45pm.
Buy Post Human W.A.R as a Steam Key.  Post Human W.A.R is a turn-based, tactical and psychological strategy game.  At the dawn of our third millennium, mankind went extinct, leaving behind a deeply affected planet Earth. Ferocious mutated animals, household robots converted for warfare, and inventive monkeys in tracksuits battle it out to decide the fate of the human heritage.  At the beginning of a battle, each player composes an army and selects one secret unit among them: the Champion. The first player to kill the opposing Champion wins the game. You're free to pick any frail or strong, flying or not, melee or ranged unit, as well as either keeping it behind your lines or exposing it to trick the enemy… To each his strategy! You'll have to read your enemy's moves and avoid his bluffs to find the Champion and get rid of him... before he gets yours!  Form your armies and set off on an adventure through solo campaigns, or face off against players online! Experience a purely strategy-oriented gameplay with nothing left to chance, and filled with tactical challenges, bluffs and absurd humor.  Features
7.40.140 Intentional damage.  (a) No person shall cause or authorize any brine water, oil, liquid dye, or other substance deleterious to tree life, to lie, leak, pour, flow or drip upon or into the soil about the base of any tree, shrub, or plant in any street, sidewalk, parkway, alley or other public property within the City, or onto any sidewalk, gutter, road, or pavement within the City at a point from which such substance may harm or kill any such tree, shrub, or plant.  (b) No person, without the approval of the Director, shall place or maintain any stone, cement or other substance on any sidewalk, street, parkway, alley or other public property so that it impedes the free access of water or air to the roots of any public tree or otherwise harm the health of the public tree.  (c) No person, without the approval of the Director, shall attach or keep attached any wire, rope, swing, or any other object to any public tree.  (d) No person shall plant or permit to grow any vine or planting that would interfere with the growth or maintenance of any public tree. (Prior code § 7613; amended by Ord. No. 1242CCS, adopted 1/26/82; Ord. No. 2388CCS § 15, adopted 1/10/12)
In Uncharted: The Lost Legacy, the treasure-hunting series is jumping into new territory, with protagonist Chole Frazer taking the reins on an excursion to India.  Tate Mosesian, art director for Naughty Dog's hotly anticipated new DLC, says that some of the design goals for The Lost Legacy were relatively straightforward. For instance, they wanted to stick to the visual look of the Uncharted series, including the expressive use of colors.  But they also had to tackle a challenge that the team didn't have to face on past Uncharted titles: this DLC was only taking place in one location, instead of spanning several continents. In a sense, the country-hopping in the other games made it easy to create what they call a "progressions of looks." For The Lost Legacy, the team had to try to make one single area feel much more diverse.  The location gave the team a gift however, in the form of the real-world reference point: what Mosesian calls the "really beautiful and intricate and stunningly awesome" Dravidian architecture style that developed thousands of years ago in South India.  The game's memorable structures and artifacts and obstacles are the result of carefully studying real world referents...but also knowing when to take liberties.  ***  The team drew from the several distinct Dravidian empires from different historical eras: Pallava (AD 600-900), Chola (AD 848–1280), and the Hoysalas (AD 1100-1343). "We could use it, but we could also get variety out of it, and even move the story forward by utilizing the different variants of this particular architectural style," Mosesian says.  While their sources of inspiration were the cultural products and aesthetics created by real ancient empires, that's not to say that the in-game creations are a model of historical accuracy.  "There are no actual massive twin Ganesha statues anywhere in the world. But there is in our game world."  "There are no actual massive twin Ganesha statues anywhere in the world (that I'm aware of), but there is in our game world," Mosesian says.  "We take those artistic principles and apply them to whatever is it we're trying to do ... as long as there's consistency there, then generally speaking, the player will accept it as being plausible."  That trade off with reality also comes into play in another area of Uncharted games, as well: the decay and wearing of the ancient ruins that players explore. If everything was accurate to how the natural elements would interact with a structure, there might not be a whole lot left.  "It's good to have portions of a level that are accurately weathered," Mosesian says. "But you have to throw a little bit of that out for the sake of the visuals."  "Mosesian recalls getting feedback after the first Uncharted from somebody who was angry that the metal bars in prison should have long ago eroded away."  Mosesian recalls seeing feedback after the first Uncharted from somebody who was angry that the metal bars in an ancient prison would have long ago eroded away.  "OK fine, that's fine, but then...how do we keep Drake in prison?" Mosesian told them.  "It's those little things where you're like, some bizarre circumstance meant that this particular bar did not rust out, and you just kind of have to let go of those things and go with the suspension of disbelief," Mosesian says. "Just play the game and have fun."  Besides, he insists, "everything starts looking the same after 1000 years."  The Lost Legacy — which is releasing roughly 15 months after Uncharted 4 — had "little to no" pre-production time, something that Mosesian claims was the project's biggest challenge. Another limiting decision, however, actually worked in The Lost Legacy's favor.  "It just doesn't feel right to throw old assets into a new game."  "One of the reasons why we were able to make this game to the same quality of Uncharted 4, and visually speaking, even a little bit better in some cases, was that we said there would be no new tech on this project," Moresain says.  One of the great things about DLC, from a developer's point of view, is that you don't have to reinvent the wheel. You can re-use technology, mechanics, locales, and characters that were created for the original title.  But the art team on The Lost Legacy didn't lean too heavily on recycled assets.  "We're crazy, we're nuts, so the majority of the stuff in The Lost Legacy is all made for this project," Mosesian says. "It just doesn't feel right to throw old assets into a new game." The team did reuse some elements, including a lot of Uncharted 4's foliage library. But even then, they had to
Saudi Araba's ambassador to the UK has attacked Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn for suggesting the kingdom supports Islamic State (IS, formerly ISIS/ISIL).  Prince Mohammed bin Nawaf bin Abdulaziz al Saud described comments made by Corbyn and former Liberal Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown as "distortion" and "an insult" to the Saudi Arabian government.  The Labour leader said on Tuesday there were several "very big questions" around the rise of IS which remained unanswered, such as who is providing financial aid to the group.  Corbyn suggested Saudi Arabia may be involved in funding IS, a theory shared by many journalists and Middle East analysts.  Writing in the Times, Prince Mohammed rebutted allegations Saudi Arabia is supporting jihadists in Syria.  "As the scourge of terrorism continues to spread, the blame game has begun. Saudi Arabia finds itself once again targeted by politicians such as Jeremy Corbyn and Lord Ashdown, who wrongly suggest that in some way we support radical extremism," he said.  "I prefer to believe this is misunderstanding, not malice. The contrary is an insult to our government, our people and our faith."  The ambassador said his country "knows the reality of terrorism intimately" and has been fighting it "for decades."  On the question of funding, he insisted Saudi Arabia had "stringent laws" to stop financial support from private individuals or societies reaching terrorists.  The kingdom's cooperation with international partners in fighting terrorism had made the world a safer place, he said.  "However, the common mischaracterization of Saudi Arabia's role in the war on terror, perhaps deliberately and for political point-scoring, stands to impede cooperation going forward."  Speaking in the House of Commons on Tuesday, Corbyn said it is important to learn who is supporting IS before extending airstrikes against the group from Iraq into Syria.  "Who is funding ISIS? Who is arming ISIS? Who is providing safe havens for ISIS? You have to ask questions about the arms that everyone has sold in the region, the role of Saudi Arabia in this. I think there are some very big questions."  Ashdown made similar allegations against Saudi Arabia when he called the close ties between the British Conservative Party and the Gulf state "worrying."  "The failure to put pressure on the Gulf states – and especially Saudi and Qatar – first of all to stop funding the Salafists and the Wahhabists, secondly to play a large part in this campaign, and other actions where the Government has refused to have a proper inquiry into the funding of jihadism in Britain, leads me to worry about the closeness between the Conservative Party and rich Arab Gulf individuals."  Saudi Arabia: Fawning Cameron starts charm offensive as relations falter https://t.co/N9LRZxTVnkpic.twitter.com/jPj7LTzCpL — RT UK (@RTUKnews) October 30, 2015  The ambassador's comments follow a threat of legal action by a Saudi justice ministry official over a tweet which called the country's capital punishment regime "ISIS like."  The tweet, the source of which has not been identified, was in response to a satirical cartoon which compared Saudi Arabia to IS.  Illustrator Peter Brookes published the cartoon in the Times on Saturday.  My cartoon Saturday @TheTimes. Isis is a barbaric death cult...what about some of our allies? #syriaairstrikespic.twitter.com/QkA4QLp9kq — Peter Brookes (@BrookesTimes) November 28, 2015  "The justice ministry will sue the person who described … the sentencing of a man to death for apostasy as being 'ISIS-like," the Saudi official said.
When nothing seems to help, I go and look at a stonecutter hammering away at his rock perhaps a hundred times without as much as a crack showing in it. Yet at the hundred and first blow it will split in two, and I know it was not that blow that did it, but all that had gone before.
Authorities in the Cayman Islands have ended a search for a U.S. Marvel/DC comic book artist who went missing while snorkeling with his wife on a vacation.  Norman Lee, who worked on Avengers and X-Men, were about 250 yards off the coast of Grand Cayman on Thursday afternoon when he became separated from wife of fives years, Jan.  Despite round-the-clock helicopter, diving and boat searches, investigators have found no sign of the 47-year-old from Weymouth, Massachusetts.  Tragic: The search for Norman Lee, an inker for Marvel/DC Comics, in the Cayman Islands has been called off  Went missing: He was snorkeling with his wife Jan on Thursday when they became separated  On Saturday evening, the search was called off after chief inspector Brad Ebanks said the currents are so strong it is 'unlikely that we will make any recovery at this stage.'  Lee started working for Marvel and DC Comics in 1995 as an 'inker', drawing over pencil sketches in pen before the comic goes to print.  He is scheduled to appear at Boston Comic Con this summer.  Long career: Lee, from Weymouth, Massachusetts, worked on Avengers and X-Men during his career  He was a permanent fixture at Comic Con events and is scheduled to appear at Boston's this July  Tributes have flooded in on Lee's Facebook page.  One of his favorite artists and a source of inspiration, Mark McKenna, wrote: 'I was thinking last night about my friends, Norman and Jan Lee, whom my heart aches for at this moment... No BS in Norman, he told it like it was.'  Fellow X-Men artist Jorge Molina wrote: 'A great talent and positive guy with a smile on his face 24/7, my thoughts go to him and his family.'
mediablast  Generic processing server built on node-plan.  Quick Start  See a working example of a mediablast server  Server Code  var http = require ( ' http ' ); var mediablast = require ( ' mediablast ' ); var app = mediablast ({ settingsFile : ' settings.json ' }); app . registerTask ( ' s3.store ' , require ( ' node-plan-s3-upload ' )); app . registerTask ( ' s3.retrieve ' , require ( ' node-plan-s3-download ' )); app . registerTask ( ' audio.waveform ' , require ( ' node-plan-waveform ' )); app . registerTask ( ' audio.transcode ' , require ( ' node-plan-transcode ' )); app . registerTask ( ' meta.callback ' , require ( ' node-plan-callback ' )); var server = http . createServer (app); server . listen ( function () { console . log ( " mediablast server online " ); });  HTTP Client Usage  Admin  Currently mediablast only supports one user. By default this user name is admin and the password is 3pTkHwHV . You should change this before you deploy.  For better user account management, see #1.  Submitting a Job  To submit a job, make a POST request to / . The tasks you have registered dictate what parameters to send with this request. Usually you will want this request to be a multipart file upload.  The request will look something like:  { " templateId " : " 6373af69-367e-48f4-8734-f30cee4f7541 " }  The response will look like:  { " id " : " 20fff6bc-fa45-44c2-a92b-7df597fdb8b1 " , // range : [ 0 , 1 ] " progress " : 1 , // one of ['processing', 'complete'] " state " : " complete " , // error identifier. If this is truthy, the job completed with an error. " error " : null , " startDate " : " 2012-08-27T13:41:17.253Z " , " endDate " : " 2012-08-27T13:41:22.006Z " , " exports " : { " example-1 " : { // Each task has its own documentation which describes how its `exports` // object is constructed. }, " example-2 " : { ... }, } }  Once you have the job id, you can use either the push notification status endpoint or the polling endpoint.  Push Notification Status Endpoint  GET /status/:jobId is an EventSource URL which provides push notifications for job status and progress updates. Each message is a JSON encoding of the job. Once the job state is complete , no more events will be sent and the client should close the EventSource.  Polling Status Endpoint  GET /poll/:jobId returns a pure JSON response instead of Server Sent Events.  Ping Endpoint  GET /status will always return {"success": true} . You may use this endpoint to determine whether the server is online and responding to requests.  Admin Interface  Monitoring Jobs  Hit /admin/status with your browser to monitor all jobs in the system.  Editing Settings and Templates  Hit /admin/settings with your browser to edit settings and templates.  Testing a Template
Enzoani Sheath 16418  BP#: 16418 Style: Alias: Hollywood Retail Price: $1980.00 BP Price: $ Save Up To: $1980.00   Hollywood Gorgeous sheath style gown with a v-neckline. Crystal embroidered detail throughout gown. Buttons down the back followed by a chapel train.   This product is currently out of stock and unavailable.  Gown Sizing  In general, wedding gowns run 1-2 sizes smaller than regular clothes so add 2 sizes to your normal dress size.. For alterations, they can usually be sized up 1 size and down 2 sizes. Call us with any questions you have at 617-923-7587.  Return Policy for discount "Off The Rack" Gowns:  Returnable within 3 days of receipt. Please view our complete return policy here: https://bridepower.com/internet-policies/. In-store: Policies vary, please see here: https://bridepower.com/in-store-policy/. Call us with any questions you have at 617-923-7587.
Since the first day of this year, thousands of otherwise law-abiding Connecticut residents - at least 20,000 and maybe as many as 100,000 - have become criminals. They have broken a new state law that required owners of military-style rifles and high capacity magazines to register them with the State Police by last Dec. 31. Not quite 50,000 rifles were registered by the deadline but that could be as little as 15 percent of the now illegal assault rifles in Connecticut, according to the state-based National Shooting Sports Foundation, which is familiar with industry sales.   Some of these rifle owners - there's no way of knowing for sure how many - may not have been aware that the rifles and high capacity magazines they had owned for months or years now have to be registered. Connecticut lawmakers enacted that requirement because they believe it is necessary to keep track of these extra-lethal weapons that can no longer be legally purchased in the state.   Other gun owners simply missed the deadline, while some are deliberately choosing to disobey the law.   We do not doubt that many sincerely believe the measure, passed after the Newtown massacre, should never have become a Connecticut law because it violates their Second Amendment right to keep and bear arms. But that doesn't give them the right to disobey it. The law's constitutionality is a matter for the courts to determine, not the individual gun owner. In the meantime, he or she must obey the law or face the consequences of breaking it.   Failure to register the rifle or its high capacity magazines is a Class D felony, punishable by up to five years in prison and a $5,000 fine. A sentence of this magnitude would be unheard of for a first-time offender, but committing a felony is serious and a blot on an otherwise clean record that would not be without consequences.   Gov. Dannel P. Malloy indicated a willingness last week to work with those who wish to obey the law when he announced the state would accept applications that were mailed in good faith before the New Year's Eve deadline but did not reach the state because of circumstances beyond the applicant's control - like the noon closing of post offices on that day.   This would, however, impact only a few hundred individuals now in violation of the law. The administration appears willing to talk about other ways to get more gun owners registered and reduce the number of Connecticut citizens who now find themselves unconvicted felons. The governor has said he is ready to discuss the issue, but it could take legislative action to extend the registration.   Since the intent of the law is to create a record and track these weapons, not to make criminals of gun owners, we would urge the administration and the legislature to find some way to provide a bit more time for registration.   No one should take any joy in having 20,000 or 100,000 citizens suddenly becoming criminals. If possible, a way should be be found to allow these gun owners a chance to reconsider and follow the law.   As to those who sincerely believe the requirement is wrong, we respect their beliefs, but that does mean they can disobey this law or any law.   The Day editorial board meets regularly with political, business and community leaders and convenes weekly to formulate editorial viewpoints. It is composed of President and Publisher Pat Richardson, Editorial Page Editor Paul Choiniere, retired Day editor Lisa McGinley, Managing Editor Tim Cotter and Staff Writer Julia Bergman. However, only the publisher and editorial page editor are responsible for developing the editorial opinions. The board operates independently from the Day newsroom.
Latest News  ICYMI: Ranking Member Nadler Statement for the Hearing on H.R. 3945, the Copyright Alternative in Small-Claims Enforcement Act of 2017 WASHINGTON, D.C. -- Yesterday, Congressman Jerrold Nadler (D-NY), Ranking Member of the House Judiciary Committee, delivered the following opening remarks during a Judiciary Committee hearing on H.R. 3945, the Copyright Alternative in Small-Claims Enforcement Act of 2017: "Mr. Chairman, in 2013, you spearheaded a comprehensive bipartisan review of the copyright system that consisted of a careful, thoughtful analysis of...  ICYMI: Statement of Ranking Member Nadler for the Hearing on "The State of Intellectual Freedom in America" Washington, D.C. – Yesterday, Congressman Jerrold Nadler (D-NY) Ranking Member of the House Judiciary Committee, delivered the following opening remarks during a Judiciary Subcommittee on the Constitution and Civil Justice hearing on "The State of Intellectual Freedom in America": "The purported subject of today's hearing is the "State of Intellectual Freedom in America." Despite this lofty title, however, the hearing's...  Judiciary and Oversight Ranking Members Respond to Latest Subpoena from House GOP Seeking to Undermine Mueller Investigation Washington, D.C. – Today, Rep. Jerrold Nadler (D-NY), the Ranking Member of the Committee on the Judiciary, and Rep. Elijah E. Cummings (D-MD), the Ranking Member of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, issued the following statement in response to the announcement that a new subpoena has been issued as part of the continuing Republican investigation into the actions of the FBI and Department of Justice (DOJ): ...  Ranking Member Nadler Floor Statement to Bring Special Counsel Independence and Integrity Act to House Floor Washington, D.C. – Today, Congressman Jerrold Nadler (D-NY), Ranking Member of the House Judiciary Committee, delivered the following remarks demanding immediate floor consideration of H.R. 5476, the Special Counsel Independence and Integrity Act. The House will vote on the previous question, which would bring the legislation to the House floor. Below is Ranking Member Nadler's floor statement, as...
You are viewing the documentation for the 2.5.x release series. The latest stable release series is 2.6.x  Search  Sometimes we would like to call other HTTP services from within a Play application. Play supports this via its WS library, which provides a way to make asynchronous HTTP calls.  There are two important parts to using the WS API: making a request, and processing the response. We'll discuss how to make both GET and POST HTTP requests first, and then show how to process the response from WS. Finally, we'll discuss some common use cases.  To use WS, first add ws to your build.sbt file:  libraryDependencies ++= Seq( ws )  Now any controller or component that wants to use WS will have to declare a dependency on the WSClient :  import javax.inject.Inject import scala.concurrent.Future import scala.concurrent.duration._ import play.api.mvc._ import play.api.libs.ws._ import play.api.http.HttpEntity import akka.actor.ActorSystem import akka.stream.ActorMaterializer import akka.stream.scaladsl._ import akka.util.ByteString import scala.concurrent.ExecutionContext class Application @Inject() (ws: WSClient) extends Controller { }  We've called the WSClient instance ws , all the following examples will assume this name.  To build an HTTP request, you start with ws.url() to specify the URL.  val request: WSRequest = ws.url(url)  This returns a WSRequest that you can use to specify various HTTP options, such as setting headers. You can chain calls together to construct complex requests.  val complexRequest: WSRequest = request.withHeaders("Accept" -> "application/json") .withRequestTimeout(10000.millis) .withQueryString("search" -> "play")  You end by calling a method corresponding to the HTTP method you want to use. This ends the chain, and uses all the options defined on the built request in the WSRequest .  val futureResponse: Future[WSResponse] = complexRequest.get()  This returns a Future[WSResponse] where the Response contains the data returned from the server.  If you need to use HTTP authentication, you can specify it in the builder, using a username, password, and an AuthScheme. Valid case objects for the AuthScheme are BASIC , DIGEST , KERBEROS , NTLM , and SPNEGO .  ws.url(url).withAuth(user, password, WSAuthScheme.BASIC).get()  If an HTTP call results in a 302 or a 301 redirect, you can automatically follow the redirect without having to make another call.  ws.url(url).withFollowRedirects(true).get()  Parameters can be specified as a series of key/value tuples.  ws.url(url).withQueryString("paramKey" -> "paramValue").get()  Headers can be specified as a series of key/value tuples.  ws.url(url).withHeaders("headerKey" -> "headerValue").get()  If you are sending plain text in a particular format, you may want to define the content type explicitly.  ws.url(url).withHeaders("Content-Type" -> "application/xml").post(xmlString)  A virtual host can be specified as a string.  ws.url(url).withVirtualHost("192.168.1.1").get()  If you wish to specify a request timeout, you can use withRequestTimeout to set a value. An infinite timeout can be set by passing Duration.Inf .  ws.url(url).withRequestTimeout(5000.millis).get()  To post url-form-encoded data a Map[String, Seq[String]] needs to be passed into post .  ws.url(url).post(Map("key" -> Seq("value")))  To post multipart-form-encoded data a Source[play.api.mvc.MultipartFormData.Part[Source[ByteString, Any]], Any] needs to be passed into post .  ws.url(url).post(Source.single(DataPart("key", "value")))  To upload a file you need to pass a play.api.mvc.MultipartFormData.FilePart[Source[ByteString, Any]] to the Source :  ws.url(url).post(Source(FilePart("hello
Few fMRI studies have investigated the brain-behavioral basis of parenting in human fathers. Ten fathers were videotaped and gave salivary testosterone samples while interacting with their 2–4 months old infants, and viewed video clips of their own infant and an unfamiliar age-, ethnicity- and sex-matched other infant during an fMRI protocol. Infant stimuli activated a network of prefrontal and subcortical brain regions. Furthermore, a subset of these regions activated significantly more to own (OWN) than other (OTHER) infants. Finally, neural responses to OWN versus OTHER were linked with paternal sensitivity, paternal reciprocity, and testosterone. In sum, our results provide a novel perspective on the links between brain, behavior, and hormones in fathers.
There was a moment in my third game of Total War: Arena that I fell in love. At the start of the game one of our players had drawn a big, big arrow down the centre. Then one had drawn an elaborate, unusually hairy dong down the map screen, the tip pointing right up the enemy's flank. It was a sophisticated plan, I think. Bait the red team into overextending, then cut their archers down before closing the escape.  Sign up for Total War: Arena right now!  Turns out, cock-based strategies really work.  The reds fell into our trap. Pikemen held the forest while light infantry charged around the side. It was merciless. A wave of remorseless militia clad in white, stabbing and sticking and stabbing again.  "LOL," said our tactically astute leader in team-chat. "WE F*****D THJEM RIGHT UP."  "Yes. Yes we did."  I, too, rolled my eyes when I first heard about Total War: Arena. Did we really need a Total War flavoured MOBA? It turns out, we didn't. Arena isn't another MOBA. It's closer to World of Tanks, but with legs.  It has more players for a start: battles are 10v10. It has more units, too: everyone is responsible for three little troupes of historical pikemen, archers or cavalry. It doesn't do in-game levelling: all your units are upgraded between matches.  Games are fast paced: units sprint everywhere and the maps are small enough to encourage quick engagements. But that doesn't make them any less tactical: it's clear that even a simple plan, if players stick to it, will usually succeed. The skills you've built in Total War work: picking flanks, charging and retreating, and the rock/paper/scissors relationships between infantry, cavalry and archers are in place. The game's bigger and more impressive somehow – with each unit being micromanaged there's just way more going on.  The maps are intricate and quite lovely: there are mountain passes to be captured and held, plains to charge over and rivers to ford or hold. They tell a story: in the centre of the newly launched Germania there's a ruined and still smouldering central forest, the trees reduced to burning stumps.  It's technically impressive too. Even in the heat of the largest battles, I didn't see a hint of slowdown. Total War has always been a system hog, yet here, you can throw hundreds of units at each-other and the engine just shrugs off the challenge.  If I have a criticism, it is that the between match interface is dramatically overcomplicated. There are three types of currency, and part of your upgrade strategy is deciding how and what to convert. Units are upgraded via a very, very detailed tech tree, but it's not clear how you progress upwards, or whether you should start with a different commander and set of units. Each unit can earn special abilities, like shield blocks or morale boosts that are activated on cool-down, which feels maybe a little videogamey, but I can forgive it. Changing the course of an engagement battle with a well-timed shield bash, and your team-mate charging a group of cavalry into the downed enemy is quite quite the thing.  Last little anecdote. We'd been caught in a difficult situation; the bulk of our army was engaged on the flanks while the enemy was charging forward. We'd left a few hoplites to hold the base, but they were massively outnumbered.  Usually, this would feel like game over. In a game with ten players, it would surely dissolve into chaos and chat room abuse.  But as one, without anyone saying a word, our team fell back to some natural chokepoints, sacrificing a few lost causes in the hope of just holding the line. It worked: redeploying just across a riverbed gave our archers cover and left the enemy bogged down. I made an actual fist-pump and everything.  I really, really like Total War: Arena. I think it's the smartest thing Creative Assembly have made in a long, long time. I can see myself playing it well into the future.  Play Total War: Arena for free, now.  Total War: Arena is in beta. You can sign up for a chance to play it at the Arena site.
Shipping  In-stock items ordered by noon, Mountain Time, leave our warehouse the same day. Items ordered after that time will ship next business day. Look under the product price above to check the product's availability.  Within the continental United States  Standard ground: Orders of single or multiple products from Bikewagon.com ship to anywhere in the continental (lower 48) United States for $5.00. Orders over $50.00 will be shipped standard ground for free. Individual items labeled with free shipping will also ship for free.*  Express shipping: For an additional charge, orders may be shipped express and will typically arrive within 1 - 2 days. To apply this option, select "Express Mail" shipping at checkout.  Hawaii & Alaska  Shipments to Alaska and Hawaii are limited to those items that can be shipped via USPS mail.  International shipping  International shipments are limited to those items that can be sent via international mail. Some brands restrict sales to U.S. customers only. International customers are responsible for all customs fees.  While most international orders will arrive within two to three weeks via First-Class International mail, please be aware that some orders may take up to 8 weeks due to slow customs processing in some countries. To avoid the possibility of this, please select another shipping method at checkout.  For orders outside of the United States and Canada over $400, we require a wire transfer payment before shipping. If you are interested in making such a purchase, please contact us for details.  See our shipping policy for complete details and a list of restricted brands.  *Complete bikes, frames, wheelsets and other oversized items are excluded from $5 and free shipping and will include the shipping charge as indicated at checkout. High-quantity orders of multiple products may also include a shipping charge. International orders and orders going to Hawaii, Alaska and U.S. territories are also excluded.  **Additional charges will be applied to items shipped outside the continental U.S. International customers are responsible for all customs fees.
The Army acknowledged Friday that Maj. Gen. John Rossi committed suicide on July 31, making him the highest-ranking soldier ever to have taken his own life.  Rossi, who was 55, was just two days from pinning on his third star and taking command of Army Space and Missile Command when he killed himself at his home at Redstone Arsenal in Alabama. '  Investigators could find no event, infidelity, misconduct or drug or alcohol abuse, that triggered Rossi's suicide, said a U.S. government official with direct knowledge of the investigation. It appears that Rossi was overwhelmed by his responsibilities, said the official who was not authorized to speak publicly about the investigation.  Rossi himself talked in March about suicide at a conference on preventing troops from killing themselves.  He held up a card from his wallet with photos of 10 soldiers who had died under his command at Fort Sill, Okla. Four of them had committed suicide.  Read More- USA Today  Image courtesy of US Army
Last night, former Athletic Brett Anderson had some choice words for the fans on Twitter. The comments seemed to be directed at A's fans in particular. His tweets have been deleted, but there were some screen grabs up this morning.  The offending tweets seemed to begin with, "If your Twitter handle has what position of the field you sit in as a fan…your life is beyond brutal and obsolete." After a fan said that Anderson knows how passionate the fans are, Anderson responded with, "That means 0."  The evening concluded with Brett Anderson tweeting out, "A lion does not lose sleep over the opinions of sheep." That's some pretty high praise for oneself, considering this "lion" has made 14 starts in the past 3 years. The player that the A's got in a trade for Anderson this past offseason, Drew Pomeranz, has already made 8 this season. The only ones getting "fleeced" here are Anderson's current employers.  Brett Anderson is no lion. Not even the fictional lions of House Lannister would have him. The people that did accept him, those that reside in the right field bleachers in Oakland, have now been slighted by this injury-prone putz. What Brett Anderson has forgotten is that the people that put where they sit in their Twitter handles are generally the people that actually go to the games. The people that supported him over the years, even when he was constantly on the DL.  Let's take a minute to look at the photo of Brett Anderson above. This was taken at the beginning of Spring Training. A day when you get to start playing the game you love, and compete for a championship. Anderson's expression does not match the excitement he should feel. Instead, it looks like frowning is the shape his face has taken from years of being sullen.  This picture explains Brett Anderson's comments, however. He is not a happy man, and people that are unhappy generally lash out at any and everyone.  On the bright side, he's not an A's on-field problem anymore, but A's fans always pay their debts.
SEATTLE — A lawsuit filed Thursday accuses Seattle Mayor Ed Murray of sexually molesting a teenage high-school dropout in the 1980s, and in interviews with The Seattle Times, two other men claim he abused them.  The mayor denied the allegations through his personal spokesman Jeff Reading.  "These false accusations are intended to damage a prominent elected official who has been a defender of vulnerable populations for decades," said a statement issued by Reading. "It is not a coincidence that this shakedown effort comes within weeks of the campaign filing deadline. These unsubstantiated assertions, dating back three decades, are categorically false."  Murray was elected mayor in 2013 after a long career in the Legislature, where he led efforts to legalize gay marriage in the state. As mayor he pushed to increase the city's minimum wage to $15 an hour and address the homelessness crisis in Seattle.  In the lawsuit filed in King County Superior Court, a 46-year-old man, identified only by the initials, D.H., said Murray "raped and molested him" over several years, beginning in 1986 — when he was 15 and addicted to crack cocaine, and when Murray was in his early 30s.  The man said he met Murray on a city bus, and Murray invited him back to his apartment, propositioning him for sex and haggling over the price.  Murray paid him $10 to $20 for each of at least 50 encounters over the next four to five years, the lawsuit said.  "I have been dealing with this for over 30 years," the man, now sober for a year, told the Times.  He said he was coming forward as part of a "healing process" after years of "the shame, the embarrassment, the guilt, the humiliation that I put myself through and that he put me through."  The man also said his father's recent death freed him of a desire to keep the abuse secret.  The newspaper also reported that two other men said they knew Murray when they lived in a Portland, Oregon, center for troubled children. Jeff Simpson and Lloyd Anderson accused Murray of abusing them in the 1980s and paying them for sex and said they'd be willing to testify about it, the Times said.  The Times said one of them talked with a social worker and detective at the time. No charges were filed and an entry in an old Multnomah County district attorney's database indicates the office considered but rejected a felony third-degree sodomy case in May 1984. Any other police and child welfare records would have been destroyed by now, officials said.  Simpson and Anderson raised the allegations a decade ago in calls to reporters and Washington state lawmakers, and they repeated them in recent interviews with the Times.  Reading's statement acknowledged those accusations.  "The two older accusations were promoted by extreme right-wing anti-gay activists in the midst of the marriage equality campaign, and were thoroughly investigated and dismissed by both law enforcement authorities and the media," the statement said.  Simpson, 49, said Murray — whom he thought of as a father — raped him over several years, starting at age 13, and in later years, paid him.  "I would really like for him to admit it and to take responsibility," Simpson told two Times reporters who visited him unannounced in Portland. "I don't necessarily think that he destroyed my life but I believe a lot of the problems I have stemmed from this."  Simpson tried to bring a lawsuit against Murray in 2007, with Anderson's support, but his lawyer withdrew from the case. In 2008, Simpson started calling media organizations and lawmakers in Olympia, saying Murray, then a state senator, was a pedophile who had sexually abused him.  Before his political career, Murray — one of seven children in an Irish Catholic family — considered the priesthood. He spent a year at a seminary in 1976 before studying sociology at the University of Portland, a private Catholic institution, according to news profiles.  Having sex with a child under 16 — the age of legal consent in Washington in 1986 and today — constitutes rape of a child under state law. The statute of limitations on any crime would have expired long ago.  The lawsuit seeks unspecified damages and says D.H. has not previously made any financial demands of Murray.
I am proud to have been a recurring guest on Kumail Nanjiani's The X-Files Files, the podcast that helped get the ball rolling for the X-Files revival we are about to enjoy on Fox. I was actually the very first guest, so I have a real affection for this show.  Kumail is hosting a marathon of The X-Files at the Cinefamily on Saturday January 16th - he'll be showing a bunch of his favorite episodes and then he's going to give us a sneak peek at the first episode of the new season. Let me give you some insider info here: the episodes Kumail plans on showing are not obvious ones, and any X-Phile will be intrigued by his choices. It would be really damn exciting if this event was just some old episodes and one of the new ones, but there's more! Kumail will be recording a live episode of The X-Files Files, and he's bringing in folks from the show as guests. It's going to be a killer event.  And it's going to be FREE. Yes, free. It'll be first come, first served, and they would like you to register at this link, although registration is not a ticket! You're still going to want to get there a early to get in line.  I'll be there, and so, I suspect, will The Truth. I can't wait.
Scalping in Oregon: State Law Gives Event Scalpers a Pass… For Now  The ticket resale market is a perfect little microcosm of our economy. There are dangers and unintended consequences to every decision. And we're left choosing between a free market bonanza and an overregulated corporate handout.  I, for one, am glad we live in the wild west: Oregon has no laws against ticket resale.  The tough thing about ticket scalping is that it's a natural expression of the marketplace. We can complain all we want about scalping, but it's the first thing we do ourselves when given the opportunity.  From an emotional standpoint we make arbitrary decisions on what tickets to a show, or game, or event is "worth." And principally nobody believes only the rich should be able to attend live events. But unlike movies, or anything you buy in a store these days, live events have a hard limit on the supply, and this hard limit means that people willing and able to pay more will prevail. Whatever someone is willing to pay is what tickets are "worth."  The strange truth of it, which can also probably be said of many aspects of the economy in general, is that scalping is as natural as adultery. And like adultery it should be discouraged, shamed, drummed out of polite conversation, but not criminalized. When we make laws banning natural economic reactions, like reselling for a profit, we create perverse incentives and criminalize regular citizens.  Scalping is unfair only in the sense that it exposes the ticket sales to the free market like everything else.  There are things thwarting that free market though, the biggest being the computer bots used by scalpers to buy up tickets en masse. The bots are programs trained on the ticket booth that go into action automatically when the tickets go on sale, circumventing buying limits and real people, perverting the buying where at least everyone with enough money has a fair shot. According to one study actually commissioned by Ticketmaster, the nations largest "authorized reseller", as much as 60% of tickets for some shows go to scalperbots .  In Oregon, we actually did go after the scalperbots. The only law we have on the books regarding ticket resale is a 2009 house bill which doesn't prohibit the act of reselling tickets at all, but it "prohibits person from intentionally selling or using software to circumvent, thwart, interfere with or evade any control or measure that ensures equitable distribution, sale or resale of admission tickets for entertainment event." In short, it makes using bots to evade ticket buying limits illegal. The bill, HB 2673, which was sponsored by Corvallis' own representative Sarah Gelser (D), actually required venues to disclose a great deal of information about the numbers of available tickets as well, but that was before it was amended.  That additional language in the bill would have had a debatable impact on actual ticket scalping, but it was campaigned against by eBay and predictably got excised from the final legislation.  You see eBay owns StubHub, an "authorized reseller" similar to Ticketmaster (I only put the term "authorized reseller" in quotes because it is shorthand for "legalized scalping conglomerate"). And these "authorized resellers" have a monopoly, or near monopoly, on the scalping game. Ticketmaster buys up tickets, marks them up and resells them. That's literally the exact same thing the scalper outside the stadium does.  Large scalping companies don't want scalping to be illegal, per se, they just want it illegal enough that they're the only ones who can get away with it.  Unfortunately there are unintended consequences to scalping and the laws setup to stop it. A good example of both in action is the Penny Arcade Expo in Seattle. Known as PAX, the gaming expo hosts over 90,000 gaming enthusiasts for a 4 day extravaganza of video, board and role playing games.  With tickets selling out faster every year, organizers didn't want the event to fall prey to the price inflation of scalping, so they tried increasingly draconian control measures on the ticket buying: limiting the number of weekend passes available, limiting the number of single day passes one person could buy, not sending out the actual entry badges until a week before the event.  None of these measures really work.  Currently, on eBay, a full set of passes for this year's PAX go for around $300, a 250% profit on the face value. But a lot of the tickets on eBay are from genuine buyers, not scalpers. Because of how fast the event sells out, and how much the tickets go for, people can't rely on buying just for themselves and hope their friends get a set too. Everyone has to overestimate the number of tickets they'll need and then sell off the extras. Who can blame them if they sell them
Huge news on the coal export front just now. As Scott Learn at The Oregonian reports, "Kinder Morgan drops plan to build coal export terminal at Port of St. Helens industrial park."  Kinder Morgan had been planning to export as much as 30 million tons of coal each year on the Columbia River from a site near Clatskanie, Oregon, but their plans ran into a buzz saw of opposition from local communities, environmental and health advocates, and even nearby industrial users. This morning they announced that they are officially abandoning their plans to build a coal terminal at Port Westward.  Sightline's research was instrumental in the debate. We published extensive documentation of Kinder Morgan's problems with coal dust at their terminals, as well as the company's lengthy rap sheet of fraud, illegal dumping, and lax safety. A month after we published our research, the utility PGE announced that it would not sublease its land at Port Westward to Kinder Morgan out of concern that the spread of coal dust would damage its gas turbines. Since then, the firm has struggled to configure its plans, but local opposition continued to mount while prices in Asia weakened.  Today's news amounts to a huge victory for the Power Past Coal campaign. Of the six coal export terminals originally planned for the Northwest, three have now been withdrawn, in large part owing to an enormous backlash to the plans.  Predictably, Kinder Morgan is trying to downplay the role of coal export opponents in thwarting the company's plans:  Kinder Morgan's Allen Fore attributed the decision not to seek permits for a coal export terminal to site logistics at the Port of St. Helens industrial park, not the controversy over coal. "We looked at multiple options and different footprints, but we couldn't find one compatible with the facility we wanted to construct," Fore said.  Yet the firm's statement is revealing. Kinder Morgan had a specific project design that they presented to the public. After PGE rejected the plan—out of very justifiable objection to Kinder Morgan's inability to contain coal dust—it had to go back to the drawing board. Having lost the element of surprise, they were met with opposition at every turn.  Find this article interesting? Please consider making a gift to support our work.  Kinder Morgan says, cryptically, that they are, "still looking for coal export sites in the Northwest," though they won't name specific sites.  Postscript 5/14/13: A reader points out that this is actually Kinder Morgan's second failed coal terminal project this year. The company backed out of plans at the Port of Wilmington, Delaware after they failed to reach agreement with the local longshoreman's union.
Manifesting and Meditation – Why a Good Manifestor Meditates  Every once in a while, even the most experienced manifesting maven can (and probably will…) get lost. Asking yourself "Which manifesting path should I now take?" is only natural, there are after all TONS of possibilities and options!  For me, realizing that manifesting get so much easier when I tune into and follow my bliss, doing what excites me, was a wonderful revelation, but it also came with its fair share of confusion.  Once you start manifesting successfully, this feeling of "I can do anything! I can be anything!" takes over for a while… and naturally, the question of "What is it that I REALLY want?" follows suit.  The 'Too Many Manifesting Options Syndrom'  A world of unlimited possibilities, governed by your true desires, can sometimes feel just as limited as the world you were living in before you started manifesting… 'cause hey, making choices can be hard!  I, personally, felt like I can manifest ONLY what I really really want. So before I can manifest anything new, I need to know that I want it… and most of the time, I didn't know what I really really want, at least, not what I want to have for the rest of my life or even for the near future.  When You Get Lost and Feel You Need 'Something' – Meditate.  Meditation takes away the focus from your brain and places it in your heart. And while your brain tends to jump between the past and future, your heart only knows the present. What you are feeling now, that's it. And it has lots of good answers, when you stop for long enough and listens to it.  It can tell you what you should really be focusing on, and what isn't really all that important to you. It can tell you what you really want NOW, and you'll find out that these are the easiest manifestations you will ever do. Sometimes it won't take more than actually acknowledging what your heart is saying, before it is manifested.  A Quick Meditation for (Usually) Non-Meditating People  So in case you're now totally jazzed up about meditation, you can start with this simple one:  1) close your eyes  2) place your hand on your heart  3) take long, deep breathes, focusing on your heart's energy  4) once you feel like your brain has started to calm down, direct your energy towards the breathing process  5) follow your breath as you inhale and exhale, until everything else becomes just the background  6) shift your attention back to your heart and ask "what do I really want, right now?"  7) continue to breathe and wait to see what comes up  Good luck!
This web edition published by eBooks@Adelaide.  Last updated Wednesday, December 17, 2014 at 10:45.  To the best of our knowledge, the text of this  work is in the "Public Domain" in Australia.  HOWEVER, copyright law varies in other countries, and the work may still be under copyright in the country from which you are accessing this website. It is your responsibility to check the applicable copyright laws in your country before downloading this work.
Persona 5's Biggest Series Launch Helps Atlus Take Its First #1 In UK Software Charts  By Sato . April 10, 2017 . 5:00am  Persona 5 celebrated the series' biggest launch with 1.5 million in global shipments last week, and the game also helped Atlus take their very first No. 1 debut in the UK software charts.  Persona 5 Tom Clancy's Ghost Recon: Wildlands LEGO Worlds Grand Theft Auto V Mass Effect: Andromeda FIFA 17 The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild Lego City Undercover Call of Duty: Infinite Warfare Overwatch  As you can see, Persona 5 managed to snag the top spot in the midst of some stiff competition. What makes it an impressive feat is not only did it manage to help Atlus get its first #1 in the UK charts, but this makes it the first JRPG to take the top spot in the UK after Ni no Kuni back in 2013 for PlayStation 3.  Final Fantasy XV came close, but no cigar, as it placed #2 behind the massively popular FIFA 17. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild, while not exactly a "JRPG," charted at #2, just behind Horizon Zero Dawn back in March.  Persona 5 is available on PlayStation 4 and PlayStation 3.
'Unprecedented' flooding north of Chicago hits about 6,800 buildings  Floodwaters in Gurnee on Thursday, as seen in this drone photo. Officials said Lake County Emergency Operations Center is actively monitoring river levels and weather forecasts, and coordinating with local jurisdictions to ensure resources are getting to where they need to go. | Mark Welsh/Daily Herald, distributed by the Associated Press  GURNEE, Ill. — Illinois officials said Friday some 6,800 buildings have been affected by "unprecedented" flooding north of Chicago, and the damage is expected to worsen this weekend as water flows down rivers into the state from Wisconsin.  "Folks think, 'Well, it's not raining anymore. Things are just fine, they're getting better.' Well, they're not," Illinois Gov. Bruce Rauner said following a tour Friday of the area. "This is dangerous, and the danger has not gone away."  The National Weather Service says the Des Plaines River and Fox River could crest on Saturday. Rauner said that could prompt local officials to evacuate some neighborhoods and communities.  Heavy rainfall that hit the Midwest on Wednesday knocked out power to thousands and closed roadways. Power outages caused by flooding forced the evacuation Wednesday of Lake Forest Hospital in suburban Chicago. Power was restored that night, but Northwestern Medicine says the hospital remained closed Friday while damaged infrastructure is restored.  Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker declared a state of emergency in Kenosha, Racine and Walworth counties on Thursday, and the National Guard was helping local officials in that state go door-to-door to check on people.  In Illinois, Lake County issued a disaster declaration, and late Friday afternoon Rauner's office issued a state disaster proclamation for Lake, McHenry and Kane.  Rauner also directed Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA) Director James K. Joseph to activate the State Emergency Operations Center (SEOC) as needed over the weekend and into next week to coordinate any requests for assistance from flood-impacted communities.  Joseph said rivers could crest at record levels, and the agency is working with local officials in Lake, McHenry, Kane, Cook and parts of DuPage counties.  Of the roughly 6,800 buildings that have been affected, about 2,100 are submerged — many along the Chain O'Lakes, Lake County Board Chairman Aaron Lawlor said. Officials predict there could be 5,800 submerged structures before the waters recede, he said.  Lawlor said the flooding is expected to be worse than the damage in 2013, the last time the area was hit, because rains "came down right on top of us."  "This is an unprecedented flood," he said.  For updates, visit the state's website at www.ready.illinois.gov.
Police Say Teenage Boy Suspected Of Starting Massive Oregon Wildfire  Enlarge this image toggle caption AP AP  Police say they have identified a 15-year-old boy suspected of setting off fireworks that may have sparked a massive wildfire raging outside Portland, Ore.  "It is believed he and others may have been using fireworks which started the forest fire along the Eagle Creek Trail," Oregon State Police said in a news release.  Authorities say an investigation is still underway into the blaze that started Saturday and has so far consumed more than 30,000 acres of forestland, choking the air and raining down ash on the nearby metropolitan area.  No charges have been filed, and police are asking anyone with information about the cause of the blaze to step forward. But fire officials say they are certain it is human-caused.  "I saw this boy lob a smoke bomb down into the ravine," hiker Liz FitzGerald told Willamette Week. "I saw his friend or a guy that was there with him videotaping it with his phone. I looked over, and I said, 'Do you realize how dangerous that is?' "  FitzGerald said she got out of harm's way and helped police track down the group of teenagers.  The flames have led to the closure of part of Interstate 84. Hundreds of homes have been evacuated so far in Oregon and neighboring Washington state, and officials say more could be coming.  "Fire burning right along a major interstate, closing 40 miles of road, threatening homes — this is a big deal," Dave Thompson, a spokesman for the Oregon Department of Transportation told The Oregonian. "This happened fairly suddenly. It blew up."  The blaze, ignited along a popular hiking trail, moved quickly enough to strand more than 140 hikers Saturday in the Columbia River Gorge National Scenic Area, according to local media.  The Spokesman-Review reports that the hikers banded together to ensure nobody was left behind, and that when one person struggled, the group would stop to provide assistance. An Air Force medic and a U.S. Forest Service worker met up with the group and helped coordinate a rescue.  Firefighters hovering overhead in a helicopter were able to lower directions toward a safe passage via a yellow ribbon.  As the group tried to make its way out, according to the newspaper, the flames came as close as 300 yards. They hiked into the night, some people using their cellphones to light the way over creeks and bridges. At one point, they lay down to rest.  "Some people were trembling. We were all cold on the ground," hiker Merribeth Midtlyng told the newspaper. "A bear actually came into our area and no one stirred. ... After all we'd been through, it seemed irrelevant to our circumstances."  A group of firefighters armed with provisions reportedly reached the group by early morning Sunday and led them 11 miles toward waiting buses that took them to safety.  Oregon Public Broadcasting reported Wednesday that the fire was at 0 percent containment. Fire officials say the estimated containment date is not until the end of the month.  "Though fire activity slowed Wednesday morning, it still threatens numerous communities, tourist attractions and resources in Oregon's scenic Columbia River Gorge. Those include the Bull Run Watershed, the source of 1 in 5 Oregonians' drinking water," OPB reports.  Since it began over the weekend, the Eagle Creek Fire has merged with a second blaze, called the Indian Creek Fire. On Tuesday night, the Multnomah County Sheriff's Office tweeted that "the fire has slowed way down for now."  The National Weather Service Portland said early Wednesday that thanks to shifting winds, the ash that had been raining down on parts of the city Tuesday should be ending and that the air quality should be improving.  The Eagle Creek Fire is one of dozens of wildfires burning across the Western United States. The Oregonian has compiled an interactive map of all of the current active wildfires across the West.  The New York Times reports:  "Meteorologists say it has been an unusually dry summer in a region known for rain. It has not rained significantly in Seattle since June ... and meteorologists say it has been more than 50 days since measurable precipitation fell in Portland, Ore."
In the midst of what seems to be a wave of Islamophobia following Donald Trump's proposal to ban Muslims from entering the U.S., yet another story of discrimination and abuse has emerged."Today. On a crowded bus. On Michigan Avenue. On my way home from a great job in a city in a diverse country that I was born in. A man screamed at me. Called me a sand ni**er. Told me I was the problem. That I need to get the fuck out of his country," wrote 27-year-old Sharareh Delara Drury, a Chicago-based Iranian-American writer and editor in a Facebook post on Monday. "I may have been wearing my scarf higher on my head than usual because it was cold out. I may have somehow looked suspicious listening to Spotify. I am half Iranian, so maybe it was my skin or my eyes."The man in question didn't just stop at verbal abuse, Drury wrote; he also spit at her."Then this man spits at me. A man in a suit and tie. Like anyone else I'd see. He spits at me and looks at me with these regular eyes now filled with anger and tells me to get the fuck off the bus, do what I'm told, because this isn't my country. This isn't my place," Drury wrote.Drury was born in Boston and is of Irish and Iranian heritage. She wrote that her father had survived the 9/11 attacks, and she couldn't believe that this type of discrimination was happening to her. Shocked, she finally stood up for herself, telling the man to back off, after which other bus riders stepped in to help. The bus driver eventually kicked the man off the bus when he noticed the commotion.Drury's post has since gone viral with more than 100,000 likes, 54,000 shares and 100 comments (and counting) from sympathetic non-Muslims and Muslims alike. Drury shared her thoughts about the incident in an interview with Refinery29.Correction: An earlier version of this story incorrectly stated that Drury is Muslim. She is Iranian-American but does not practice Islam.
"It can't be easy, that's all I'm saying…", And Kate wants to yell it out, that of course it isn't easy, that that much should be obvious. She wants to howler at the one who presents herself as her friend, and she wants to kick and scream; She wants to foam at the mouth, and she wants her reply to be sharp.   But of course Kate knows that she would never do any of those things. It's just isn't how she was raised. Besides it's Max that's talking to her, and Max doesn't deserve any of her rage.   A lot can be said for the plastic smiles and little snarky comments that Kate has fallen victim to lately, she feels - herself - in part guilty for what happened. How can she not? It was her decision, and it was her drink and - no matter what happened, no matter if she was tricked into going with a false pretense or not, she still went. And no matter how many times Max tells her it wasn't her fault she can't quite believe it.   Maybe it's punishment for her feelings. Divine intervention in a way? Kate doesn't know if she should cry or yell out. She's confused. Everything in her mind is fuzzy, has been for so long now. Ever since she met Max that first day.   Not that she can't separate what she feels, from how she should feel, it's just hard - harder than it should be - and she has more pressing issues in her mind. And she can't quite push herself to yell at Max, or at anyone really. She's just defeated, pushed and abused and tired. All the things her mother and family warned her about and yet -   It truly is hard to be a philistine, to be able to enjoy the delicate curves in the nape of Max's neck, or the way her eyes glitter when she smiles, or even the way there's this slight hesitation, how her mouth slowly curves upwards, before she speaks. If there's something Kate truly appreciates about her object of desire, about the one that she met in that ill fated day, is that she's always positive. Like a Proton, not that Kate has always paid much attention to science class but she knows that Max is like one. She never seems to doubt, question, or give up. Like she's lived through stuff a thousand times and she knows what she's doing.   Kate is just about to go into how she would like to know what she, herself is doing with her life; How she'd like a plan, a guide to follow that's not the one her family brought upon her - because that one has been failed, so so hard - When Max speaks.  It takes her a moment to catch on all the levity on Max's voice. The way she half shrugs and does her best to make her feel better. It comes naturally to her. Not an edge to her voice, not one ounce of tension. It's like she practiced this moment over and over. Kate would really know how she's able to do it so easily.   Maybe it isn't easy, but that just how it seems to her. Max is practically perfect at this stuff, but then what is Max not good at?   "Hello, earth to Kate, are you ok?" , Again, the same question, just more directly asked . It has never been easy being her, and no, she's not ok. But she's sure that Max can't do much more than she did to help her. And why bother pointing it out? She's probably only running on her good will.  Kate attempts to smile. Attempts being the key word there, she isn't quite sure if she succeeds, wh a t with every single doubt in her he ad multiplied tenfold. She isn't sure if Max buys it or not, but, as much as she wishes to be able to pass all her doubts as momentary, little chimps in her armor, she isn't all that sure that is possible.  She has read the messages, straight from her family. She knows what people think of her. Heck she knows her reputation, and what every action and word she has ever said has been invalidated, like it's purely a front.   And then Max touches her. Kate can't help it, she recoils at the contact. What is wrong with her? Why can't she even be touched by the one she dares call a friend without retreating into herself? How can she prove to Max she's fine like that? Hands caressing her cross like it is the only thing she still has as a base, tears that insist on creeping into her eyes, smile that rings untrue?  Max, blessed might she be, understands her mistake and too, retreats. Pushing herself away from Kate, leaving her wondering if this is it, if Max is giving
Sign up for one of our email newsletters.  A regional 911 dispatch system designed to provide uninterrupted service should individual counties experience an outage did not live up to that promise for several hours Tuesday morning.  A telephone server that provides 911 service to 13 Western Pennsylvania counties failed around 6 a.m., resulting in an outage for 911 services in Westmoreland, Armstrong, Somerset, Indiana, Butler and Cambria counties.  County officials said the issue appeared to be with the phone provider through which the 911 centers are connected.  "There was a glitch somewhere. We don't know where. We're still trying to find out," said Steve Bicehouse, Butler County's emergency services director.  Service in Butler and Somerset was restored about 9 a.m., and Westmoreland and Indiana resumed service about 10 a.m. The outages Tuesday, though brief, caused concern.  "This is unacceptable to us," Bicehouse said. "We can't have this happen again."  Since 2012, more than a dozen counties in Western Pennsylvania — including those affected Tuesday morning — have joined to form Western Pennsylvania County Regional ESInet, or WestCORE.  The aim of the network was to lower costs for each county as well as streamline the emergency dispatch process by replacing outdated equipment and allowing county dispatch centers to use the same computer network.  Doing so, officials said at the time, would allow one county to pick up the 911 calls of another should that county have system problems or failure.  But that didn't happen Tuesday, leaving callers unable to reach first responders via the three-digit emergency number.  "We thought we had a fail safe in place, but it didn't work," said Roland Mertz, director of Westmoreland County's public safety department.  While the system was off-line, emergency dispatchers in Westmoreland and Butler counties fielded calls through a 10-digit telephone number.  "Luckily, the timing was such that we didn't have a large volume of calls," Bicehouse said.  Officials have asked Airbus DS Communications, the company that built the 911 phone switch, and CenturyLink, the phone provider, to pinpoint why the safety valve failed "so it doesn't happen again," said Ron Baustert, Armstrong County's 911 coordinator.  Attempts to reach officials at Airbus and CenturyLink were unsuccessful.  WestCORE includes Allegheny, Butler, Westmoreland, Somerset, Indiana, Armstrong, Fayette, Forest, Greene, Lawrence, Mercer, Cambria and Venango.  "The system's been relatively stable," Bicehouse said. "Today something happened. That's what we're trying to get to the bottom of."  Trib Total Media staff writer Rich Cholodofsky contributed to this report. Guza can be reached at 412-380-8519 or mguza@tribweb.com. Raap can be reached at 412-320-7827 or traap@tribweb.com.
Jake Shields today admitted to taking a banned diuretic supplied by a friend prior to UFC 150.  Shields (30-7-1), 36, spoke to the Nevada State Athletic Commission via telephone while seeking a license to fight Brian Foster (22-6) at WSOF 17 on Saturday in Las Vegas. Fighters who are older than 35 are required to appear before the commission.  Shields was granted a conditional license pending the completion of his pre-fight medical paperwork, which lacks a clean MRI and hepatitis-B test. His fight headlines WSOF 17, which takes place at Planet Hollywood in Las Vegas. The main card airs on NBCSN following prelims on MMAjunkie.  Open records laws in Colorado prevented the state's athletic commission from disclosing the banned substance for which Shields tested positive following a victory over Ed Herman at UFC 150, which took place in Denver on Aug. 11, 2012.  Shields announced he had taken a banned substance and was suspended six months by the Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies' Boxing Commission, which oversaw the event. But the fighter declined to give additional details about the substance, and the commission could not disclose it.  Speaking before the five-member commission, Shields today said he was given the substance by "someone I know through another fighter" and took it to help him cut weight for the fight, which initially was a win but later changed to a no-contest.  Asked to elaborate on the diuretic he took, Shields said, "I don't really know too much about it, to be honest.  "Obviously it was a mistake, and I served my suspension," he added.  Shields said he didn't remember whether he had been required to disclose any substances he was taking prior to the fight. In Nevada, pre-fight medical paperwork asks fighters to disclose any medications or substances they've taken in the previous two weeks.  "I learned from my mistakes," he said. "I definitely don't want to go through what I went through before."  Shields was also grilled about his role in an infamous brawl in 2010 under the now-defunct Strikeforce banner that led to a fine and 90-day suspension. Shields explained to the commission the circumstances surrounding the incident, which resulted in an in-cage melee between his camp and Jason "Mayhem" Millerz. The commission sought assurance that there would be no similar situation in Nevada.  Shields pledged not to run afoul of the NSAC. He said he would review the commission's list of banned substances and review the commission's policy on unsportsmanlike conduct.  Shields said he is in the process of getting his medical paperwork updated and will submit the necessary forms for licensure.  For more on WSOF 17, check out the MMA Rumors section of the site.
Free Bet Profit Explained  In 'Step 4 - Profiting From Free Bets' we said that you will make between £9 to £15 from a £20 free bet, depending on the odds you choose. Here is a table from the Coral offer showing this.  £20 Free Bet  Back Odds Betfair  Liability Your Profit  (% conversion) 2.0 £11 £9 (45%) 3.0 £30 £12 (60%) 4.0 £50 £13 (65%) 5.0 £65 £14 (70%) 6.0 £90 £15 (75%)  As you can see from the above table, if we choose odds of 2.0, our £20 free bet converts to £9 cash, which is 45% conversion from free bet to cash. Whereas if we choose odds of 6.0, our £20 free bet converts to £15 cash, which is a 75% conversion from free bet to cash.  In this optional article, we explain the why higher odds means higher profit and run through an example.  Why Higher Odds = Higher Profit?  If our £20 free bet wins, we do not receive the £20 stake back as part of our winnings.  Therefore, by betting on a dead cert, we are limiting our winnings to a small amount given our £20 stake is not returned.  Whereas if we bet on team with high odds that could make us £100+, we can make a big profit as our £20 stake is quite small in comparison to our winnings. The only consideration with high odds, is it requires a higher liability in Betfair Exchange.  Gimme an example with low odds!  Sure, let's say we use our Coral £20 free bet on England to beat Russia. The odds are 1.95:  Our winnings if England win are:  £20 x 1.95 = £39  minus our £20 free bet stake = £19  To guarantee a profit, we use matched betting by placing a lay bet on Betfair Exchange. With lay odds of 1.99:  We can enter these 3 numbers (£20, 1.28, 1.35) into the Calculator, remembering to use 'Free Bet SNR' in the dropdown:  This shows us by using odds of 1.95 our guarantee profit is £9.30 from our £20 free bet.  On the plus side we only need £9.69 in our Betfair account, being the liability.  Great that I make £9.30, but where actually is my profit?  It simply depends on whether your bookmaker or exchange bet win:  As you can see from the above table:  If England win, we win our Coral free bet for £19 winnings, but lose our Betfair £9.69 liability. This give us a net profit of £9.31.  If England do not win (draw or Russia win), we lose our Coral free bet (costs us nothing), but win our Betfair £9.79 lay bet. Deducting the 5% commission, this gives us a net profit of £9.30.  Gimme an example with high odds!  No problem, let's say we use our Coral £20 free bet on Ukraine to beat Germany. The odds are 6.0:  Our winnings if Ukraine win are:  £20 x 6 = £120  less our £20 free bet stake = £100  To guarantee a profit, we use matched betting by placing a lay bet on Betfair Exchange. With lay odds of 6.4:  We can enter these 3 numbers (£20, 6, 6.4) into the Calculator, remembering to use 'Free Bet SNR' in the dropdown.  This shows us by using odds of 6.0 our guarantee profit is now £14.95 from our £20 free bet.  Just be wary that we need £85.05 in our Betfair account, being the liability.  Even better that I make £14.95, but where actually is my profit?  Exactly the same as the previous example, it simply depends on whether your bookmaker or exchange bet win:  As you can see from the above table:  If Ukraine win, we win our Coral free bet for £100 winnings, but lose our Betfair £85.05 liability. This give us a net profit of £14.95.  If Ukraine do not win (draw or Germany win), we lose our Coral free bet (costs us nothing), but win our Betfair £15.75 lay bet. Deducting the 5% commission, this gives us net profit of £14.96.
Share 0 SHARES  WITH tragic shootings unfolding across America with ever increasing regularity, the Media has reassured the public that the perfect US gunman is only a matter of years away.  "We were so, so very close with this latest one," shared grinning Sky News editor Mags Cubbs, "he nearly had it all. He was misogynistic, tick, he looked a bit foreign, tick and he had vague ties to Hollywood I think, tick. He had a video too. Tick!"  Many top executives at American news channels seem to share the same opinion. "Always at a time like this we mourn, we mourn the fact that in this day and age no mass shooter is live-tweeting their killings. It abhorrent and it can't go on," shared Ron Moals of Fox News.  "The day a sexist Muslim who plays video games and has a history of mental disorders turns up, shoots people and films it. Well, that's the day we switch to a 36-hour-a-day news cycle," he added gleefully.  He went to bemoan the news media's bad luck when it came to mass shootings stating that none have effectively met all the criteria for what is known in the media as 'killergasm'.  Leading forensic psychiatrists have consistently criticised the media for their coverage of mass shootings, stating that certain types of reporting can lead to further shootings, but those in the media dispute these solid, peer reviewed facts.  "We are balanced in our coverage, we only give over 95% of it to the killer. And if, as stated by experts, that elevating a killer's name to front page of every paper and news bulletin in the world increases the likelihood of similar shootings occurring well, that's win-win for us, more reporting for us to do," explained an editor for US news channel CNN.  Several editors went on to confirm to WWN that there was no public interest served by trying to remember the victims of barbaric and thoughtless shootings as there are simply too many names.  WWN Live Show Tickets: Here
10 vehicles stolen from Northwest Side in the last month  At least ten vehicles have been stolen from the Albany Park and Irving Park neighborhoods on the Northwest Side in the last month.  Seven of the vehicles were legally parked when they were stolen, and three were left running with the keys in the ignition, according to a community alert from Chicago Police.  The thefts happened:  between 5:30 a.m. and 8 a.m. Nov. 15 in the 3800 block of West Leland;  at 4:42 p.m. Nov. 20 in the 3500 block of West Lawrence;  at 1 a.m. Nov. 21 in the 4500 block of North Bernard;  between 6 p.m. and 6:30 p.m. Nov. 21 in the 4100 block of North Hamlin;  between 4 p.m. and 10 p.m. Nov. 24 in the 4700 block of North St. Louis;  between 11:45 p.m. Nov. 29 and 7 a.m. Nov. 30 in the 4600 block of North Hamlin;  at 12:10 p.m. Nov. 30 in the 4600 block of North Avers;  between 5 p.m. Dec. 1 and 7:15 a.m. Dec. 2 in the 4200 block of North Bernard;  at 7:30 p.m. Dec. 4 in the 3500 block of West Lawrence; and  between 6:55 a.m. and 7 a.m. Dec. 8 in the 4200 block of North St. Louis.  Anyone with information is asked to call Area North detectives at (312) 744-8263.
We Are Bringing Integrity Back to Buying Software  My Choice Software is an award-winning seller of your favorite software, hardware, and electronic products. Our goal is to offer the best prices, and ensure that you find the best product to fit your needs. Our U.S. based support team can help you install software products right over the phone and is available free of charge via phone, email, text, and web chat. We have the software or services you want, whether you're a student looking for the best deal on Microsoft Office, or a large business in need of a managed services provider.
This is a really cool unit - looks great with super visibility from a distance, tuning is quick, stable and a pleasure to use, and the size/weight allows for a wide range of applications, many other tuners can't accommodate.   BUT, there are a couple important points to consider before buying.   The first is the ruggedness, or lack-there-of. The unit is all plastic, and it is a glossy plastic that is very susceptible to fingerprints, scratches, etc. Shockingly, the rack ears are actually plastic as well and snap on the unit all flimsy-like. It is just a matter of time before these will break so you may want to just order a couple replacements sets in advance to be ready on that inevitable day.   The Second is just a detail, but if you use it with an external rack master power switch, you still have to manually turn it on each time as it won't automatically turn on when power is switched off and on externally.   But the Third, and the motivator of my review, is the buffered output. Unless you can use this in a scenario where you are feeding it from a dedicated Tuner Output from some other unit, or a splitter, etc, you may seriously want to consider a different tuner.   When setup inline, inserted in your signal path, the buffered output is really cut-rate and just destroys the sound of your guitar - rolling highs and totally messing with the dynamics, killing clarity and definition - and not just a little! I first tested the unit at low living room volumes and even at low volume it was so noticeable I thought at first that something had changed on my amp's settings and kept checking my tone control to make sure it wasn't rolled down or something. After deducing that it was the tuner, I swapped cables, even swapped the unit with the second of the two I bought. Turned out the cause was the PB05 and both units did the same thing. Sure, it "works" inline, but you really can't use it that way in the real world without the large sacrifice of sounding like crap, something most self-respecting guitarists will be unlikely to do.   In my case, it's all good, as my final intended application can be setup with dedicated Tuner-Out feeds and I won't be utilizing the output - I'll just have to mute a different way. But were it not the case, and if these things didn't look as cool as they do, these would be going back in a heartbeat!   Pretty disappointed in KORG on this considering the high quality of sound and construction of their previous rack tuners that have served me well for countless years. But you do gotta dig that 3D blue tuning display! :)
rjppunk Member   Join Date: Jan 2009 Location: Vermont/Rhode Island Posts: 584 Vehicle Year: 1997 Vehicle Make: Ford Vehicle Model: Ranger I use this vehicle for: masculinity Rep Power: 21 Rep Power:  Double DIN radio install on a 97 ranger  rjppunk   Disclaimer:  The Ranger Station.com, The Ranger Station.com Staff, nor the original poster are responsible for you doing this modification to your vehicle. By doing this modification and following this how-to you, the installer, take full responsibility if anything is damaged or messed up. If you have questions, feel free to PM the original poster or ask in the appropriate section of The Ranger Station.com forums.   Difficulty:  4 out of 10   Time:  2-3 hours   Explaination:  How to fit a double DIN head unit into the Ford Rangers 1.8 DIN dash mount.   Tools:  Ratchet set w/ a 9/32 socket  Box cutter  files  Dremel with cutting edge and sanding edge  flat head screw driver   Parts:  Pioneer AVIC-F700BT (or a double DIN HU)  metra 95-5600 dash kit   Steps:  1   Using a 9/32 socket, unscrew the the two bolts holding in the dash piece   2   Disconnect the 12volt plugs and cruise control (use a small flat head screw driver to remove the plug, be careful of the drivers side 12 volt cigarette lighter)   3   to give yourself some room, remove the air duct ply gently popping the clips that hold it in place.   4   Using a dremel cut/sand away the upper and lower lips but keep the sides intact. Use a file and the box cutter to finish the edges.   5   cut off the small nub to allow the dash kit to mount flush.   6   Mount the front trim piece.   7   attach the left and right slots by hooking the tabs into the sockets inside the trim piece   8   Slide the dash over your head unit and screw in the slots.   9   And you have successfully mounted your AVIC-F700BT (or other double DIN) to your dash!!! You can run a bead of silicon behind the dash to close the small gaps or you can leave it as is. Original poster:rjppunkDisclaimer:The Ranger Station.com, The Ranger Station.com Staff, nor the original poster are responsible for you doing this modification to your vehicle. By doing this modification and following this how-to you, the installer, take full responsibility if anything is damaged or messed up. If you have questions, feel free to PM the original poster or ask in the appropriate section of The Ranger Station.com forums.Difficulty:4 out of 10Time:2-3 hoursExplaination:How to fit a double DIN head unit into the Ford Rangers 1.8 DIN dash mount.Tools:Ratchet set w/ a 9/32 socketBox cutterfilesDremel with cutting edge and sanding edgeflat head screw driverParts:Pioneer AVIC-F700BT (or a double DIN HU)metra 95-5600 dash kitSteps:Using a 9/32 socket, unscrew the the two bolts holding in the dash pieceDisconnect the 12volt plugs and cruise control (use a small flat head screw driver to remove the plug, be careful of the drivers side 12 volt cigarette lighter)to give yourself some room, remove the air duct ply gently popping the clips that hold it in place.Using a dremel cut/sand away the upper and lower lips but keep the sides intact. Use a file and the box cutter to finish the edges.cut off the small nub to allow the dash kit to mount flush.Mount the front trim piece.attach the left and right slots by hooking the tabs into the sockets inside the trim pieceSlide the dash over your head unit and screw in the slots.And you have successfully mounted your AVIC-F700BT (or other double DIN) to your dash!!! You can run a bead of silicon behind the dash to close the small gaps or you can leave it as is.  Retarded amounts of subs = intermodular distortion, not a bad @$$ system. __________________Retarded amounts of subs = intermodular distortion, not a bad @$$ system. Last edited by rjppunk; 04-14-2009 at 09:08 AM . Reason: not in the tech format
It has advanced radar, forward-looking infrared cameras, and laser rangefinders—all used to help the 13-man crew direct a barrage of lethal fire to the ground from 12,000 feet. But for all of this advanced technology, the vision of the U.S. Air Force Special Operations Command gunships can be thwarted by the threatening adversary known as a cloudy sky.  Advertisement - Continue Reading Below  The Air Force has a solution: Launch a small unmanned aircraft from the gunship to drop below the cloud cover and serve as the eyes of the AC-130's crew. Special Operations officials last year spoke publicly about using a drone called the Coyote—the wings of the Coyote unfold as the drone launches from a six-inch-wide tube. A higher-endurance version is in development.  Weapons are getting smarter and drones are getting smaller, and pretty soon it will be hard to tell the difference. "The main weakness of sUAS [small unmanned aircraft systems] is range," says U.S. Air Force Brigadier General Alexus Grynkewich, deputy director for operations at the National Joint Operations and Intelligence Center and coauthor of a recently released Pentagon study called "Air Superiority 2030 Flight Plan." "You need some delivery method to get them close."  Grynkewich sees the engineering challenge as a series of trade-offs. A heavier engine increases a drone's range, but the airplane that launches it isn't able to carry as many. The amount of sophistication on the sensor adds expense to the drone, which may be lost in battle. And the wingspan is limited by the hardware on the airplane. Despite these complexities, the Air Force sees smart but disposable aircraft as an important solution: Airpower is a game of threat and response. One side makes a powerful radar array, the other creates stealth warplanes that can fly undetected. By the time the new airplane is ready to meet the old threat, a new one has emerged. It's a lot easier, cheaper, and faster, however, to redesign a drone than an entire airplane. "The idea is to have a tech refresh fielded in months instead of years," says Reid Melville, strategy lead for unmanned systems at the Air Force Research Laboratory at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base. "That way, when we get surprised, we will have the infrastructure in place to make a rapid change."  Advertisement - Continue Reading Below  Except when it comes to singing The Righteous Brothers songs in bars, this new generation of drones promises to be the perfect wingman. They make no mistakes and have no emotion. And if the situation demands it, they are willing sacrifices. There is one big difference, however: Like soldiers, drones will always deserve gratitude. Unlike soldiers, however, they'll never deserve a funeral.  The Arsenal  Seven of the most promising designs right now.  Miniature Air-Launched Decoy (MALD)  •MALD is a trailblazer. In the mid-1990s DARPA started researching this small jet-engine-powered craft, fired from a warplane's wing, that could fly along GPS waypoints and emit signals to mimic a full-size aircraft. Hidden air-defense systems shoot at MALD and expose themselves to counterattack. After a stutter-step start, the technology caught up with the idea and in 2009 Raytheon delivered the first MALD to the Air Force. Recent upgrades include a carbon-composite fuselage that lightens the airframe. An upcoming datalink ability will enable pilots to reprogram MALD's flight path after launch.  •Status: Currently deployed.  Ryan Inzana  Coyote  •Dropped from an airplane, these disposable drones are launched from a six-inch tube and unfold in flight. They are currently launched from National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration airplanes to study hurricanes. The Air Force special-ops folks have converted them for use on gunships, to aim at targets obscured by clouds.  •Status: Currently deployed.  Air-Launched, Tube-Integrated, Unmanned System (ALTIUS)  Drones such as the Coyote can stay airborne for only an hour. The USAF tactical off-board sensing program wants a drone that can provide continuous surveillance coverage for at least four. So they came up with ALTIUS. It has a state-of-the-art, high-energy-density power system that can withstand harsh environmental conditions, does not pose an explosive hazard, and can be stored for more than six months. It uses a highly efficient, lightweight carbon-composite airframe, and its slender shape is designed to fit in a six- to eight-inch launch tube.  Advertisement - Continue Reading Below  Advertisement - Continue Reading Below  •Status: In development. Anticipated deployment: ten years.  Agilepod  •The Air
WSJ's Katherine Rosman has the story of scientists learning more about how and why humans cry. Specifically, why men and women cry differently.  You first feel your bottom lip tremble as your work is critiqued in a meeting. Or maybe it's a clenching of your jaw. Or perhaps there is no warning at all. One moment you're composed and the next … waterworks.  We can alter the shapes of our bodies, slow the signs of aging and learn to control our heart rates. Yet we're often powerless when it comes to crying.  Some...
The Singularity is Nonsense Technological Singularity It's come to my attention that some futurists are still referring to future rapid developments in technology as a "singularity" or a "technological singularity". History Use of the term "the singularity" in this context appears to have originated with the science fiction writer, Vernor Vinge, in 1993. See here for details. Vinge describes the singularity as follows: It is a point where our old models must be discarded and a new reality rules. - http://www.ugcs.caltech.edu/~phoenix/vinge/vinge-sing.html Problems The problem with using the term "the singularity" is that the phenomena in question doesn't look very singular. We are certainly in the middle of a period of exponential growth - and the rate of progress shows little sign of slowing its rate of increase. However, exponential curves simply don't have "singular" points on them. Look at an exponential curve at any point, and it appears self-similar - no part of it is much different from any other point. The idea of a singularity seems to suggest a sort of super-exponential growth. This diagram - from Ray Kurzweil - illustrates the idea:  http://www.kurzweilai.net/articles/images/chart01.jpg ...or at least it would do - if it were not purporting to measuring the "mass use of inventions" in millimeters. The suggestion seems to be that growth will get faster and faster - asymptotically approaching infinity at some particular future point in time. If that was ever to happen, the term "singularity" would be certainly be quite appropriate. However, the idea is a ridiculous one. On closer examination, practically no futurists actually support it. Instead they typically claim that the term "singularity" has different inspirations: In futures studies, a technological singularity represents a hypothetical "event horizon" in the predictability of human technological development. Past this event horizon, following the creation of strong artificial intelligence or the amplification of human intelligence, existing models of the future cease to give reliable or accurate answers.  [...]  Vinge's singularity is commonly misunderstood to mean technological progress will rise to infinity, as happens in a mathematical singularity. Actually, the term was chosen as a metaphor from physics rather than mathematics: as one approaches the Singularity, models of the future become less reliable, just as conventional models of physics break down as one approaches a gravitational singularity. - http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technological_singularity [...] just as our model of physics breaks down when it tries to model the singularity at the center of a black hole, our model of the world breaks down when it tries to model a future that contains entities smarter than human. - http://www.singinst.org/overview/whatisthesingularity I note that these descriptions can't seem to make up their mind whether they are talking about an event horizon, that cannot be seen beyond, or a singularity where things break down. Unfortunately, Vinge never defined his terminology - resulting in multiple interpretations. Nick Bostrom has noted: "The singularity" has been taken to mean different things by different authors, and sometimes by the same author on different occasions. There are at least three clearly distinct theoretical entities that might be refered to by this term: A point in time at which the speed of technological development becomes extremely great. (Verticality)  The creation of superhuman artificial intelligence. (Superintelligence)  A point in time beyond which we can predict nothing, except maybe what we can deduce directly from physics. (Unpredictability, aka "prediction horizon") - Nick Bostrom Using the term "singularity" looks to me like an appalling mistake, however you look at it. The connotations of either something becoming infinite, or only happening once - are far too strong. The term immediately conjours up an innacurate and misleading impression. As for the claims that the ability to predict the future is limited - that is caused by a well-known phenomenon known as chaos. Small uncertainties in initial conditions become magnified as time passes into large uncertainties in the outcome. The phenomenon applies on a large range of timescales: some things are unpredictable over a few seconds - others are highly predictable over billions of years. The breakdown of prediction does not happen at a particular point in the future - rather different phenomena are predictable on different timescales. Our ability to predict the future of human evolution in much detail may well be limited - as predicted events become increasingly uncertain the further into the future projections are made. However, that has always been the case - and no doubt it will always be the case. There will always be difficulties in looking very far into the future - since some elements of what will happen are contingent on chance events. The shape of things to come
Chris Basham's first goal of the season was enough to give Sheffield United a third win in four games  Sheffield United continued their fine start to the season by sending Ipswich to a third defeat in four games.  Chris Basham's header four minutes after the interval was enough for a third win in four games for the Blades.  Martyn Waghorn came close to an immediate equaliser when he struck the crossbar from Tristan Nydam's pass.  Leon Clarke also hit the bar with an effort for the hosts, who overcame a serious-looking injury to defender Kieron Freeman in the first half.  Chris Wilder's side, promoted as League One champions in May, went level on points with Cardiff City behind new leaders Wolves, but with an inferior goal difference.  Basham's first goal of the season saw the centre-back rise above Myles Kenlock in the Ipswich area to head home John Fleck's cross.  Freeman, who came into the Sheffield United side at right-back for the injured George Baldock, was stretchered off himself after being involved in a goalmouth melee to deny David McGoldrick a chance to open the scoring.  The Blades withstood a spell of pressure from Ipswich just before half-time as Jonas Knudsen and Waghorn also threatened.  Ipswich manager Mick McCarthy is now without an away win in the month of October in his past 18 matches, a run stretching back to 2008 when he guided Wolves to a 3-2 victory at Watford.  Sheffield United boss Chris Wilder:  "It was a good performance with a good result. We got our rewards for a decent, solid display. To keep a clean sheet with the players they've got at the top of the pitch is very pleasing.  "Kieron Freeman is going for a scan on Monday. It was a collision in the box but I ask the players to play for us and put their bodies on the line. Sometimes these things happen.  "It's disappointing for him. He'll have a period out, but I don't know how long that's going to be. We'll find out when the scan comes back.  "I can't remember the last time Chris Basham scored but he's played a part in about 140 points in the last two years so that's not bad."  Ipswich Town boss Mick McCarthy:  "I'm pretty annoyed we've lost the game. They started well, but we grew into it and it's a very good goal for them but a very poor goal for us to concede.  "I had to change the way we were playing as they were having too much of the ball. When I changed it to the 4-3-3, we stemmed the tide, somewhat.  "I don't think there's going to be anybody like Newcastle or Brighton. I don't see that. But, I do think Sheffield United are a good side and will be up in the top six.  "I don't think they're going to fall over. They've got momentum, a good way of playing and they all look to be working very hard for each other."
Donald Trump once saw a child on an escalator and said, "I'm going to be dating her in 10 years" A new video shows the horrifying moment.  Donald Trump has said a lot of horrific things about adult women in the past year. But in a video unearthed by CBS News, Trump is seen targeting a different kind of victim: a young child.  In the 1992 video, Trump, who was 46 at the time, can be heard talking to a little girl, asking her if she's going to go up an escalator. After she says she is, Trump turns to the camera and says, "I am going to be dating her in 10 years. Can you believe it?"  It's unclear how old the girl is, but she's a child. And already, Trump is objectifying her.  This is part of a very long pattern for Trump. As Libby Nelson explained for Vox, Trump seems to only show his feelings about women based on their physical characteristics or sexuality:  Trump is incapable of separating a woman's value from her physical appearance. He assumes that his intimate commentary on women's bodies is always welcome, no matter who might be listening — as the leaked audio, in which Trump is having a conversation with an acquaintance in a professional setting, demonstrates. He apparently never stops to consider how the women he's subjecting to all of this might feel. In a professional setting, it's degrading to know that people are paying more attention to your looks than your abilities or achievements. It's gross for your boss to tell you you're beautiful, or for a man with more power than you to speculate about what you're like in bed. It's dehumanizing to be reduced to a set of breasts and a pretty face.  Apparently, this part of Trump's character applies even to children.  Watch: More and more women are accusing Donald Trump of sexual assault
Beloved by enthusiasts everywhere, Lamborghini cars are built for speed and to look the part. Extreme style and extreme performance are the chief characteristics of Ferrari's national rival. Unless your zip code is 90210, you're not likely to see a scissor-doored Lamborghini ahead of you in the Starbucks drive-thru or parked...  Beloved by enthusiasts everywhere, Lamborghini cars are built for speed and to look the part. Extreme style and extreme performance are the chief characteristics of Ferrari's national rival. Unless your zip code is 90210, you're not likely to see a scissor-doored Lamborghini ahead of you in the Starbucks drive-thru or parked next to you at the mall; these are exclusive automobiles designed to cater to a small, very specialized audience.  During World War II, company founder Ferruccio Lamborghini served with the Italian Air Force's mechanics corps, where he became proficient at working with engines. After the war, Italy was plagued with scarcity; one such shortage involved tractors. Sensing an opportunity, Lamborghini purchased surplus military machines and reconfigured them as tractors. It was a canny move that resulted in a thriving business for the young entrepreneur, one that quickly made him a very wealthy man.  By the 1950s, Lamborghini's business had become even more successful, expanding to include heaters and air-conditioning units. As a car enthusiast, Lamborghini drove the best sports cars of the day. Somewhat disappointed with the Ferraris, he vowed to build a better car. Armed with millions of lira in investment money, he retreated to the small village of Sant'Agata to build a state-of-the-art automotive factory. On his payroll was noted automotive engineer Giotto Bizzarrini, who'd previously worked at Ferrari.  Automobili Lamborghini SpA. was officially founded in 1963. That same year, the very first Lamborghini, the 350GT, debuted at the Turin Motor Show. The car's name came from its engine size, a 3.5-liter four-cam V12. Then came the 400GT, which was produced until 1968. But it was the stunning midengine Miura, produced from 1967-'73, that catapulted Lamborghini to worldwide acclaim.  Lamborghini's tractor business suffered hard times in the early '70s, which led him to sell a controlling interest of Automobili Lamborghini SpA to a Swiss industrialist. The Italian's problems were worsened by that decade's oil crisis, and he wound up selling the remaining amount of his shares. Still, Lamborghini had found the wherewithal to bring out the Miura's replacement, the iconic Countach, for 1974. The company also invested millions in the development of a new vehicle, the military truck-style Cheetah, but its sales were disappointing. By the end of the decade, the automaker had declared bankruptcy.  The company got back on its feet in the 1980s. The key was Lamborghini's over-the-top Countach. Though introduced previously, the Countach was now fully styled with outlandish vents, aggressive fender flares and a huge rear wing that made it the perfect exotic car for that's decade's brash mentality. Perhaps hoping to cash in on the firm's revived popularity, the company's managers sold Lamborghini to Chrysler in 1987.  The '90s started out with the debut of the Countach's successor, the Diablo. Not long after, though, another change of ownership took place in 1994, when Lamborghini was acquired by three Far Eastern companies. Megatech was the largest of the trio and the primary shareholder. By the late 1990s, Lamborghini was in financial hot water once again. As before, the lack of a diversified product lineup was hurting the company's ability to compete globally. It was acquired by Volkswagen (which also owns other luxury marques such as Audi and Bentley) in 1998.  The new millennium saw the debut of the Murcielago, which replaced the Diablo, and the (relatively) more affordable Gallardo. Today, the current German/Italian marriage seems to be quite stable, and the rise in quality and refinement of Lamborghini's vehicles leaves no doubt as to its benefit.  Our expert team of auto researchers have reviewed the Lamborghini cars and compiled a list of inventory for you to lease a Lamborghini and shop new and used Lamborghini.  Hide Lamborghini History
Tensions from La Vista Mayor Doug Kindig's alleged comments to an atheist after a Memorial Day Service created a political storm Monday.  Omaha atheists are angry at Kindig and the city's connection to a Christian memorial service.  Advertisement  "We have a political figure, such as the mayor of the city, picking such marginalizing comments. We want to make sure that he knows it's wrong," said Jill Fitzgerald, atheist demonstrator.  -- Video: Religious groups protest at La Vista City Hall  Kindig allegedly told atheist Robert Fuller "minorities are not going to run my city," following the Faith and Freedom Day Memorial Day service at La Vista Daze.  "As soon as it got attention, I knew that my community would support me, and they have," Fuller said.  Members of the Harrison Street Baptist Church were also there to protest.   "We concluded that it was a constitutional event. It is really a private worship service, not a government-sponsored one," said Rev. Roger Criser, chief organizer of the La Vista Daze memorial service. "I don't see the mayor as a bigot. I don't think he was making any kind of racial comments or anything like that."  The two groups didn't engaged in conflict, in fact, both sides kept to themselves -- church members prayed while atheists made speeches.  "I hope we get some visibility for concerns of non-believers and religious minorities," said Tom Gray, atheist demonstrator.  According to La Vista police, the gathering was the first-ever protest at City Hall.  Fuller said he will talk to the mayor Tuesday.  "I wanted to talk to him about the church and state issues regarding the Memorial Day service, the prayer walk that opens La Vista daze," he said.  KETV NewsWatch 7 could not confirm Fuller's meeting with Kindig. Some sources in the city said it's been postponed.  AlertMe
Some Interesting Facts about Nikola Tesla   Did You Know?...  Tesla was considered an eccentric man who talked of death rays that could destroy 10,000 airplanes at a distance of 250 miles. However, Tesla devised the AC (alternating current) system that we use in our homes today. AC offered great advantages over the rival DC system.  By using Tesla's transformers, AC voltages could be stepped up (or down) and transmitted over long distances through thin wires. DC could not (it required a large power plant every square mile and had to be transmitted through very thick cables). Tesla also invented electric motors that today are used in every appliance in your house. He invented fluorescent bulbs and neon signs. He designed the world's first hydroelectric plant, in Niagara Falls and patented the first speedometer for cars. Thomas Edison, who's money was invested in DC power systems, did his best to discredit Tesla. Edison even went so far as to claimed that AC electricity was far more dangerous than his DC power.  At the 1893 World Exposition in Chicago, Tesla demonstrated the safety AC electricity was by passing high frequency AC power through his body to power light bulbs. He then was able to shoot large lightning bolts from his Tesla coils to the crowd without harm.  By 1898, he was demonstrating to the world the first remote controlled model boat at Madison Square Garden. Tesla wanted to provide free energy to the world and in 1900 began construction of a "Wireless Broadcasting System" tower on Long Island, New York. This tower was intended to link the world's telephone and telegraph services, and transmit pictures, stock reports, and weather information worldwide.  Tesla ran into financial trouble with the world thinking he was insane. The transmission of voice, picture, and electricity was unheard of at this time.  Tesla demonstrated the principles behind radio nearly ten years before Marconi. In 1943 the US Supreme Court ruled that Marconi's patents were invalid due to Tesla's descriptions of his work. Still, most references do not credit Tesla with the invention of radio.  Tesla made the earth into an electric tuning fork by getting a steam-driven oscillator to vibrate at the same frequency as the ground. The result was an earthquake in the surrounding city. He had accurately determined the resonant frequencies of the Earth almost 60 years before science could confirm his results.  In 1899, he sent waves of energy through the Earth, thus providing the theory for earthquake seismic stations. By adding electricity to the returning energy he created the largest man-made lightning bolt ever recorded (130 feet). The accompanying thunder was heard 22 miles away and created a blue glow around the meadow outside his Colorado laboratory.  At the beginning of World War I, Tesla proposed the use of energy waves to detect German submarines (known today as RADAR). Thomas Edison rejected his idea as ludicrous.  Eventually, Tesla was awarded the Edison Medal, which was an insult to Tesla, given the verbal abuse that he had taken from Edison.  Tesla died penniless at age 86 on January 7, 1943. In his lifetime, he received over 800 different patents. Scientists continue to scour through his notes.  The "Tesla bladeless disk turbine engine" that he designed, when made with modern materials, is proving to be among the most efficient motors ever made. Experiments he performed with cryogenic liquids and electricity provide the foundation for modern superconductors. He also talked about experiments that suggested particles with fractional charges of an electron. In 1977 they were "discovered" as quarks! Nikola Tesla has been referred to as "the man who invented the 20th century." His use of alternating electrical currents and invention of the AC engine brought revolutionary changes in electrical power generation and transmission that remain the global standard today. Tesla recited entire books from memory, and designed his machines in his head, rather than on paper. He was also frequently ridiculed for proposing "impossible" inventions … which he then went and invented anyway.  Various Nikola Tesla Quotes:   * "The idea came like a flash of lightning and in an instant the truth was revealed." * "The motors I build there were exactly as I imagined them. I made no attempt to improve the design, but merely reproduced the pictures as they appeared to my vision and the operation was always as I expected." * "Ideas came in an uninterrupted stream and the only difficulty I had was to hold them fast ... In less than two months I evolved virtually all the types of motors and modifications of the systems which now identified with my name." * "I do not think there is any thrill that can go through the human heart like that felt by the inventor as he sees some creation of the brain unfolding to success... Such emotions make a man forget food, sleep, friends, love, everything." * "Instinct is something which transcends knowledge. We have, undoubtedly, certain finer fibers that enable us to perceive truths when logical deduction, or any other willful effort of the brain,
anti-establishment website will help you enter the arena of local town and county politics in Any County, USA in 2019.  Strategy to Defeat Gerrymandering Locally  In the September 13th, 2018 Primary, there were at least four anti-establishment upsets.  In the Federal Primary, Socialist Democrat Alexandria Ocasio Cortez 's win in the New York's 14th Congressional District is an example of our local strategy below, which can be applied to national and state elections. Better to fight within the two major parties than to be an outsider in a third party. Cortez won by knocking on doors, talking to people to compound a following. Alexandria Ocasio Cortez kicked out 20 year incumbent Joe Crowley, who was also Democratic Party Chair in her district.  "It's a Dog Eat Dog World."  "If you can't fight them, join them."  There is still time to Primary  For a fighting chance in Suffolk County town politics, we need "Red Dog Republicans" to stand down the Blue Dog Democrats .  If the two major duopolistic Suffolk County political parties won't fight fair and they don't, we offer an alternate strategy to win back our government.  As an example, President Donald J. Trump is a Red Dog Republican . Before Donald Trump registered Republican, he was a Democrat. We need more Red Dog Republicans like Donald Trump to break into the unjust duopoly using our strategy.  Picking a political party must now be a practical decision - not an ethical or moral decision - because the political party in reality is just a vehicle to use in order to get on the ballot.  Donald Trump picked a political party pragmatically; Trump used our strategy and he wound up winning the 2016 Republican Primary. But ...   Trumpty Dumpty is in for a fall  With his promises ten feet tall.  Copyright © 2016  Unfortunately, it seems Trump ran for President for his own self-interest rather than for the benefit of all the people as he promised in his inaugural address on January 20, 2017. An honest, truthful person would have been preferred.  Yet, one cannot help wander if Trump's campaign promises - like for one cancelling NAFTA - have been thwarted by the neo-liberal corporatocracy.  The government of, by, and for the people has been infiltrated by the lobbyists and supporters of corporations - mostly lawyers, insurance salesmen, realtors (like Donald Trump), bankers - all supported by multimillionaires. Corporations now control our government and seem to control President Donald Trump. So our alternative strategy is to take our local town and County government back by   Fighting Dirty. So first join ...  before October 12, 2018 the political party destined to win because of unfairly drawn, gerrymandered boundaries. Boundaries are drawn by the NYS Senate every 10 years after the census which will be taken next in 2020. The political party which controls the New York State Senate, currently Republican, redraws boundaries of voting districts so that it contains a majority, usually 60%, of that political party's members.  Therefore, the political party which is in control of the NYS Senate, in 2020 and every other 10 years, will predetermine the winning political parties within each of the political districts in which you live. The Democrat and Republican top dogs make deals to divvy up their fiefdoms.  Note, the party gerrymandered to win will vary depending on the level of politics you wish to enter as a maverick candidate. For instance, in the Town of Babylon, the only un-televised town in Suffolk County, the Town itself is gerrymandered Democratic while the Congressional House seat is gerrymandered Republican.   If you want to run a primary, the political party you should join - strategically - should be the party destined to win. The winner is predetermined because the boundaries drawn include a majority of a selected political party's voters. Thus we the people get rigged elections by "fixed" gerrymandering. Gerrymandering is the redistricting of your geographic area, in your town according to the census taken every ten (10) years.  2020 is on its way and the census will take place and the party which winds up with the majority of the senate seats in New York State, or in your particular state, will get the prize of redrawing your district's boundaries so that they can keep their majority for the next ten years till 2030.  Therefore, the 2018 state elections are the most important to focus on this year because new boundaries will be drawn in 2020. These boundaries will be drawn to include the majority of voters in that chosen political party's favor.  September 13, 2018 Primary Political Machine   Republicans, Democrats and Conservatives Keep Primary List a Secret. Corruption. Why? Money, Jobs, Power and Control.   The Suffolk County Conservative Party with 22,185 members
Stolen Chalice Overview Type Armor Shader Rarity Legendary Player Class All Technical Specifications Quality 0 Tier 5 Inventory Information Max Stack 1 Transferable True Item Action Discard Where to Find Dropped as Loot? False Vendor Eva Levante Price  20 7500 Glimmer Level 20 API Information Item Hash 1759332263 Template: [Source] [Talk]  Stolen Chalice is a legendary shader.[1]  Sources Edit  Stolen Chalice can be retrieved from one of the following activities/vendors:  Guardian Outfitter Eva Levante, the Guardian Outfitter, sometimes sells this item in the Tower.
My legal saga started last summer with a knock at the door, behind which stood two federal agents ready to to serve me with a court order requiring the installation of surveillance equipment on my company's network.  My company, Lavabit, provided email services to 410,000 people – including Edward Snowden, according to news reports – and thrived by offering features specifically designed to protect the privacy and security of its customers. I had no choice but to consent to the installation of their device, which would hand the US government access to all of the messages – to and from all of my customers – as they travelled between their email accounts other providers on the Internet.  But that wasn't enough. The federal agents then claimed that their court order required me to surrender my company's private encryption keys, and I balked. What they said they needed were customer passwords – which were sent securely – so that they could access the plain-text versions of messages from customers using my company's encrypted storage feature. (The government would later claim they only made this demand because of my "noncompliance".)   Bothered by what the agents were saying, I informed them that I would first need to read the order they had just delivered – and then consult with an attorney. The feds seemed surprised by my hesitation.  What ensued was a flurry of legal proceedings that would last 38 days, ending not only my startup but also destroying, bit by bit, the very principle upon which I founded it – that we all have a right to personal privacy.   In the first two weeks, I was served legal papers a total of seven times and was in contact with the FBI every other day. (This was the period a prosecutor would later characterize as my "period of silence".) It took a week for me to identify an attorney who could adequately represent me, given the complex technological and legal issues involved – and we were in contact for less than a day when agents served me with a summons ordering me to appear in a Virginia courtroom, over 1,000 miles from my home. Two days later, I was served the first subpoena for the encryption keys.   With such short notice, my first attorney was unable to appear alongside me in court. Because the whole case was under seal, I couldn't even admit to anyone who wasn't an attorney that I needed a lawyer, let alone why. In the days before my appearance, I would spend hours repeating the facts of the case to a dozen attorneys, as I sought someone else that was qualified to represent me. I also discovered that as a third party in a federal criminal indictment, I had no right to counsel. After all, only my property was in jeopardy – not my liberty. Finally, I was forced to choose between appearing alone or facing a bench warrant for my arrest.   In Virginia, the government replaced its encryption key subpoena with a search warrant and a new court date. I retained a small, local law firm before I went back to my home state, which was then forced to assemble a legal strategy and file briefs in just a few short days. The court barred them from consulting outside experts about either the statutes or the technology involved in the case. The court didn't even deliver transcripts of my first appearance to my own lawyers for two months, and forced them to proceed without access to the information they needed.   Then, a federal judge entered an order of contempt against me – without even so much as a hearing.   But the judge created a loophole: without a hearing, I was never given the opportunity to object, let alone make any any substantive defense, to the contempt change. Without any objection (because I wasn't allowed a hearing), the appellate court waived consideration of the substantive questions my case raised – and upheld the contempt charge, on the grounds that I hadn't disputed it in court. Since the US supreme court traditionally declines to review decided on wholly procedural grounds, I will be permanently denied justice.   In the meantime, I had a hard decision to make. I had not devoted 10 years of my life to building Lavabit, only to become complicit in a plan which I felt would have involved the wholesale violation of my customers' right to privacy. Thus with no alternative, the decision was obvious: I had to shut down my company.   The largest technological question we raised in our appeal (which the courts refused to consider) was what constitutes a "search", i.e., whether law enforcement can demand the encryption keys of a business and use those keys to inspect the private communications of every customer, even when the court has only authorized them to access information belonging to specific targets.   The problem here is technological: until any communication has been decrypted and the contents parsed, it is currently impossible for a surveillance device to determine which network connections belong to any given suspect. The government argued that, since the "inspection" of the data was to be carried out by a machine, they were exempt from the normal search-and-seizure protections of the Fourth Amendment.
FORGOTTEN DARE #6: INDUCE SLEEP PARALYSIS  Now that the night has died down and it's time for us to go to sleep, the last dare will be for you guys to get your body in a sleep paralysis state. In case you didn't already know, it's a stage where you can't move your body at all but you are still conscious. Often people will see horrifying figures and beings crawling there way.  The steps are relatively simple but if done correctly, will provide terrifying results. Sleep paralysis can also be a gateway to lucid dreaming.
During the course of World War Two Ireland held an official policy of neutrality. With great energy and enthusiasm the people of Ireland prepared themselves as best they could to look after their well being and sovereignty in this time shortages and fear of invasion. This site will hopefully be able to set about describing some of the events and occurrences in Ireland during this time.   At the same time, the people of Northern Ireland were caught up in the mailstrom that was the Second World War. It was a testing time for the fledling Northern State as its rulers strove to prove their loyalty to the United Kingdom. By providing an industrial base and a vital Atlantic base area, Northern Ireland was deeply involved in the Second World War. They sadly too, suffered the direct effects of modern warfare.   This period in Irish history is referred to, with some under statement as, "The Emergency".This name stems from the Emergency Powers Act 1939, which was in force during the war, in Ireland.
BARNEGAT, NJ - On the evening of Monday December 12, Lisa Consiglio-Duchin was last seen in Barnegat where she parked her car at the Route 9 and Bayshore Boulevard intersection. Lisa took a bus to the Port Authority Terminal in Manhattan. She arrived at approximately 11:00 p.m.  The police believe she was heading to see the Christmas Tree at Rockefeller Center. She has not been seen or heard from since Monday night. Her cell phone and credit cards were found in her car and it is likely that she has very little cash on her.  Lisa is 45 years old, 5-foot-3, and about 170 pounds. She has long brown wavy hair and brown eyes. She was last seen wearing jeans, a turquoise colored shirt, 3/4 length black coat, white Sketchers, and carrying a large black Michael Kors purse with gold trim.  Sign Up for E-News  Lisa also has tattoo of a rose, a scar over her eye, and a slight gap between her front teeth.  Barnegat Police ask that if anyone has any information about Lisa's whereabouts to please contact them at (609) 698-5000.  For current information and how to help visit: www.HelpFindLisa.com
Move over, Janet Jackson: America is officially more concerned with the future of the internet than with your nipple.  After a day of protest against Federal Communications Commission (FCC) proposals for regulating the internet that was coordinated by some of the world's largest tech companies, the agency announced on Wednesday it had received a record 1,477,301 public comments about the proposals since July.  The previous record of 1.4 million was set in 2004 when an alleged "wardrobe malfunction" during the halftime show at the Super Bowl led to Jackson's breast (plus nipple shield) being flashed to an audience of 111 million.  The record was broken as tech companies including Twitter, Reddit, Google and others called on their users to contact the FCC and Congress and express their disapproval over new rules now being considered that they claim would impact "net neutrality".  Net neutrality is the concept that all traffic on the internet is treated equally and that no internet service provider can offer a higher speed service that could unfairly advantage one content provider over another.  The number of submissions is likely to rise even higher before a Monday deadline for public comments on the FCC proposals, which are a result of chairman Tom Wheeler's being forced to rewrite the rules on net neutrality after a federal court tossed the agency's previous set.  One of the proposals has sparked controversy because it would allow internet service providers like Verizon, AT&T and Comcast to create a so-called "fast lane" for certain traffic – a move critics say would de facto create slow lanes.  Comments to the FCC spiked earlier this year when comedian John Oliver, on his HBO show, called on people to bombard the FCC in support of net neutrality. "The only two words in the English language more boring than net neutrality are 'featuring Sting,'"­ said Oliver. "But here's the thing. Net neutrality is actually hugely important."  The FCC's antiquated and under funded systems crashed under the volume of calls and submissions shortly after Oliver's remarks.  The FCC fined CBS a record $500,000 over the Jackson incident, though that fine was eventually overturned on appeal. Several big media conglomerates imposed a blacklist on Jackson's music and videos in the immediate wake of the scandal.
WASHINGTON ― The Jones Act waiver for Puerto Rico expired Sunday night, and "it is not being extended at this time," Department of Homeland Security spokesman David Lapan told HuffPost on Monday.  DHS had temporarily waived the Jones Act ― an arguably outdated law that imposes exorbitant shipping costs on the U.S. island ― on Sept. 28. The waiver had meant that Puerto Rico had the option of importing food, fuel and supplies more quickly, and for half the cost, in the aftermath of Hurricane Maria.  With the 1920 law back in effect, the island is now required to pay much higher costs to import supplies. The Jones Act requires that all goods shipped between U.S. ports be carried by U.S.-owned and operated ships, which are more expensive vessels than others in the global marketplace. That's meant that Puerto Rico pays double the costs to import goods from the U.S. mainland compared with neighboring islands ― and that U.S. vessels are making bank.  The return to higher shipping costs won't help Puerto Rico as it tries to climb out of economic devastation. Nearly half of the 3.4 million Americans on the island still don't have drinking water since Maria hit nearly three weeks ago. Just 15 percent have electricity. Many people still haven't heard from loved ones, and at least 39 deaths have been attributed to the storm.  Lapan said DHS is "always prepared to review requests on a case-by-case basis and respond quickly" to possible waivers of the Jones Act. But those decisions have to be related to national defense, he said, and are not driven by cost-related matters.  "We believe that extending the waiver is unnecessary to support the humanitarian relief efforts on the island," Lapan said. "There is an ample supply of Jones Act-qualified vessels to ensure that cargo is able to reach Puerto Rico."  Mario Tama via Getty Images Maria Chiclano, who has no running water or power in her home, washes clothes with her sons in the Espiritu Santo river during heavy rains, more than two weeks after Hurricane Maria devastated Puerto Rico.  Despite DHS' position, Puerto Rico Gov. Ricardo Rossello said Monday night that he wants another extension of the Jones Act waiver.  "I think we should have it," Rossello told CBS News' David Begnaud. "In this emergency phase, while we're looking to sustain and save lives, we should have all of the assets at hand."  President Donald Trump, who is spending Monday golfing, had originally hedged on waiving the Jones Act for Puerto Rico at all, saying "a lot of shippers" didn't want him to do it. He eventually caved to pressure from lawmakers including Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.).  McCain has been pushing to get rid of the Jones Act altogether. It costs Puerto Rico hundreds of millions of dollars every year, and he recently introduced legislation to nix the law.  "Now that the temporary Jones Act waiver for Puerto Rico has expired, it is more important than ever for Congress to pass my bill to permanently exempt Puerto Rico from this archaic and burdensome law," McCain said in a statement to HuffPost. "Until we provide Puerto Rico with long-term relief, the Jones Act will continue to hinder much-needed efforts to help the people of Puerto Rico recover and rebuild from Hurricane Maria."
Researchers over at Check Point Security have discovered a severe infection in 38 Android devices which came pre-installed, belonging to a large telecommunications company, as well as a multinational technology firm.  According to the security firm, the malware arrived before users turned on their handsets for the first time. "The malicious apps were not part of the official ROM supplied by the vendor, and were added somewhere along the supply chain," the report stated. It affected many devices from various brands, which include the following:  Samsung Galaxy Note2  LG G4  Samsung Galaxy S7  Samsung Galaxy S4  Samsung Galaxy Note4  Samsung Galaxy Note5  Xiaomi Mi 4i  Xiaomi Redmi  ZTE X500  Samsung Galaxy Note3  Samsung Galaxy Note Edge  Samsung Galaxy Tab S2  Samsung Galaxy A5  Vivo X6 Plus  Asus Zenfone 2  Lenovo S90  Oppo R7 Plus  Oppo N3  Lenovo A850  Most of the malware found pre-installed on affected devices were information stealers and rough ad networks, which included a ransomware called Slocker. This crypto-malware uses AES encryption algorithm to lock a victim's files, and then demands money in exchange of unlocking them.  Check Point notes that the most notable rough adnet to target the devices is the Loki malware. "The malware displays illegitimate advertisements to generate revenue," says the security firm. "As part of its operation, the malware steals data about the device and installs itself to system, allowing it to take full control of the device and achieve persistency."  While it is of course advised to be wary of where we download our apps, it is noted that pre-installed malware is a completely different problem to tackle. Check Point expounds further:  Pre-installed malware compromise the security even of the most careful users. In addition, a user who receives a device already containing malware will not be able to notice any change in the device's activity which often occur once a malware is installed. The discovery of the pre-installed malware raises some alarming issues regarding mobile security. Users could receive devices which contain backdoors or are rooted without their knowledge.  Those who are interested in knowing more regarding the malware and the affected devices can check out the source link. Also, it is advised to utilize advanced security software which is capable of detecting and blocking malicious software, like Lookout or Malwarebytes Anti-Malware, which can help prevent malicious attacks in the long run.  Source: Check Point Security via The Independent
Bakersfield, CA (93301)  Today  Some clouds this evening will give way to mainly clear skies overnight. Low 62F. Winds light and variable..  Tonight  Some clouds this evening will give way to mainly clear skies overnight. Low 62F. Winds light and variable.
About "Wu-Tang: 7th Chamber"  This track appears twice on the 36 Chambers album, once in its original form and again as a remix called "Wu-Tang: 7th Chamber – Pt. II". The remix uses the same vocals but begins with a snippet of "Clan in Da Front".
Many men try to achieve the appearance of having a thicker and fuller beard for a variety of reasons. Maybe they have dreams of competing in a men's beard competition, or maybe its purely for the aesthetic reasoning. Either way, it's undeniable that some men do go through issues regarding the growth of their facial hair. The combination of having too early, a less than par skincare routines, and a poor diet can make any man's beard look patchy, or just simply weak.   Since beards are coming back in style and many are associating them with power and masculinity, it's not a shocker to know that a variety of men want to grow a fantastic, thick, beard. There are some generic reasons why some men's beards are thicker than others, and there are a few tips that can help the possibility of your bread becoming thicker.  Before getting into the variety of tips, the first step is to do a mental test of the qualities of your beard. You should separate them into three categories: thickness, length, and liveliness. Though out of all of these three categories, the hardest one to fix is thickness as it is mainly related to your genetics.  How does a beard appear to be thicker?  While some men do have the luxury of being able to grow a thick beard within a couple of weeks, other men seem to be waiting a lifetime to get the desired look. While it may seem as if most men beards grown on different rates – a majority is actually grown in a similar time span.  The three factors that give the appearance of a man having a thicker bear is the colour of the beard (mainly when it appears darker), the overall density, and the length of the beard and hair follicles. While genetics do play a major role in your beard thickness, just making simple changes to your daily routine can help increase the overall health of your beard and finally give you the look that you've been looking for.  1. Adopt a Better Skin Care Routine  While it may not be the most masculine thing to change – its true. Having better and healthier skin will lead to a healthier and thicker beard. Other than making your skin look more pleasant to touch and view, finding a good moisturiser and cleanser can help your beard in more ways than one.  The act of cleansing and moisturising your face on a daily basis (once in the morning and once before bed), will help stimulate circulation throughout your hair follicles, along with exfoliating and getting rid of dead skin cells that could be causing a delayed growth with your beard. On the other hand, moisturising will keep your skin hydrated enough to grow thicker hair without the added itchiness.  2. Pick Up Cardio  Having excess weight can stunt the growth of your bead due to it meaning that you most likely have an unhealthy lifestyle. Exercising is known to help stimulate beard growth and make you feel more confident. However, cardio has been studied to be the best exercise to incorporate.  Some of the most popular cardio workout, such as running, biking, and dancing have been proven to help your beard grow faster as well. This is due to an increase in testosterone – which is needed to promote hair follicles becoming stronger along with growth. It also stimulates blood circulation within the body that has a variety of benefits.  3. Be less Stressed  It's a fact that stress can lead to a variety of issues in your life. Stress has the power to impact your physical appearance by making you look more agitated, and that can have an impact on the appearance and lustre of your beard. To be a bit scientific, stress will affect your cortisol which in turn creates a negative relationship with your body's testosterone creation. Along with creating issues with your blood vessels – stress is just a big negative you need to get rid of.  Both kinds of stress, short-term, and long-term can make your beard grown in patchier or less dense. Although having a bad sleep schedule that is caused stress makes the challenge of growing a beard more of a hassle. While getting rid of stress is a personal issue that must be solved, mediation and stress relieving techniques will help you and your beard our tremendously.  4. Create a Better Diet  Having a diet that is filled with vitamins and good nutrients can help the growth of your beard. This can be created by eating more veggies, fruits, and healthy meats – such as fish and chicken. A few of the recommended foods that you should begin eating weekly are eggs, healthy greens, and a variety of nuts without the added salt or sugar. This simple step will help your beard look more thick along with giving you more energy throughout the day.
The Red Samurai, colloquially called Reds [1], are the most feared of Renraku's elite security forces. They are listed as on par with the Tir Ghosts and other elite military units in the Sixth World. They are known for their fanaticism for the Renraku megacorporation and their advanced combat military armor which resembles ancient samurai armor.  The Red Samurai are often organized in groups of 5, with at least one spellcaster. They possess an unusually strong teamwork bond, as most squads train together over a period of one and a half years at the Forge (in Japanese, kaeteru). The squad assignments persist after graduation, and the squad becomes like a close-knit family.  The Red Samurai have a thorough genetic and racial screening process, which excludes non-humans (or relatives of non-humans). The vast majority of Red Samurai are Japanese, and most Red Samurai are male soldiers. They falsely believe that their rigorous racial purity standards bring them strength, and thus are frequently overconfident when facing non-human metahumans. An exception seems to exist with expatriate Tir elves, especially those who are mages.  The Red Samurai are woefully behind in covert ops and espionage compared to other elite military and corporate units, due to their racial homogeneity. Most Renraku covert and espionage operations are assigned to the Red Ninja or contracted out to shadowrunners. The Red Samurai excel in situations where stealth or subterfuge is not a factor.  References Edit  Index Edit
Abstract  In this seminar we will present our methodology of unleashing the potential of GPU computing in legacy Fortran codes: to what degree the source code has to be modified to become usable on GPUs, how to turn single-threaded Fortran code into multi-threaded ensemble, how to pack all code into single GPU kernel to minimize synchronization stalls, how to map small loops onto parallel threads with custom directives and LLVM/NVVM, how to retain the preferred Fortran formatted outputs and other questions. The seminar is intended to introduce scientific code developers into techniques beyond the standard CUDA/OpenCL/OpenACC programming methodology, conserve the existing codebase and achieve high GPU utilization. About the speaker Dmitry Mikushin holds MS degree in computer science from the Lomonosov Moscow State University. His working experience includes GPUs and CellBE software engineering at NVIDIA (2009-2011), computational science and GPU-enabled compilers at the University of Lugano (2012-present). At Applied Parallel Computing LLC (2011-present) he leads GPU porting and optimization projects as well as delivery of HPC training courses to academia and industry.
Earth's magnetic field is known to have flipped many times throughout our planet's history. Its dipole magnetic field, like that of a bar magnet, remains about the same intensity for thousands to millions of years, and then – for incompletely known reasons – it occasionally weakens and reverses direction. That weakening and reversal was supposed to take on the order of several thousand years. A new study by an international team of scientists, however, demonstrates that the last magnetic reversal – 786,000 years ago – actually happened very quickly, in less than 100 years, or roughly the span of a modern human lifetime. The study will be published in the November 2014 issue of Geophysical Journal International.  The discovery comes as new evidence indicates that the intensity of Earth's magnetic field is decreasing 10 times faster than normal, leading some geophysicists to predict a reversal within a few thousand years.  Though a magnetic reversal is a major planet-wide event driven by convection in Earth's iron core, there are no documented catastrophes associated with past reversals, despite much searching in the geologic and biologic record. Today, however, such a reversal could potentially wreak havoc with our electrical grid, generating currents that might take it down.  And since Earth's magnetic field protects life from energetic particles from the sun and cosmic rays, both of which can cause genetic mutations, a weakening or temporary loss of the field before a permanent reversal could increase cancer rates. The danger to life would be even greater if flips were preceded by long periods of unstable magnetic behavior.  Paul Renne, director of the Berkeley Geochronology Center and a University of California Berkeley professor-in-residence of Earth and planetary science is a coauthor of the study. He said:  We should be thinking more about what the biologic effects would be.  The new finding is based on measurements of the magnetic field alignment in layers of ancient lake sediments now exposed in the Sulmona basin of the Apennine Mountains east of Rome, Italy. The lake sediments are interbedded with ash layers erupted from the Roman volcanic province, a large area of volcanoes upwind of the former lake that includes periodically erupting volcanoes near Sabatini, Vesuvius and the Alban Hills.  Italian researchers measured the magnetic field directions frozen into the sediments as they accumulated at the bottom of the ancient lake.  Scientists at University of California, Berkeley then used argon-argon dating, a method widely used to determine the ages of rocks, whether they're thousands or billions of years old, to determine the age of ash layers above and below the sediment layer recording the last reversal.  Because the lake sediments were deposited at a high and steady rate over a 10,000-year period, the team was able to interpolate the date of the layer showing the magnetic reversal, called the Matuyama-Brunhes transition, at approximately 786,000 years ago. This date is far more precise than that from previous studies, which placed the reversal between 770,000 and 795,000 years ago. Renne said:  What's incredible is that you go from reverse polarity to a field that is normal with essentially nothing in between, which means it had to have happened very quickly, probably in less than 100 years. We don't know whether the next reversal will occur as suddenly as this one did, but we also don't know that it won't.  Bottom line: Imagine that compasses now pointed south instead of north. It's not as bizarre as it sounds. It will happen when Earth's magnetic field reverses. A new study indicates the last reversal – 786,000 years ago – happened in roughly the span of a human lifetime.  Read more from the University of California Berkeley
Matthew Crain, 35, was shot and arrested by police after he allegedly killed his roommate and her daughter's 17-year-old boyfriend  An Arizona man who allegedly killed his roommate and her daughter's 17-year-old boyfriend during an argument is now in critical condition after he was shot and taken into custody by police.  Matthew Crain, 35, is suspected of fatally shooting Stacey Seward, 33, and Alex Tamborski, who were both found dead inside a Gilbert home by police on Sunday.  Seward's daughter, who also lived in the residence, managed to escape. She told police it was Crain who killed her mother and boyfriend, according to authorities.  Police were called to the home around 2.45am by Seward, who requested assistance with a roommate dispute, according to The Arizona Republic.  Seward and Tamborski were both dead when officers arrived on the scene, and Crain had fled, police said.  Officers reported that Crain was considered armed and dangerous and advised neighbors to lock their doors and remain inside their homes, according to ABC 15.  After five hours of searching, officers found Crain by a canal a mile away from the home.  Police said Crain ignored the two officers' commands and, after he took cover, was perceived as a threat.  Cain was shot multiple times by the two officers and was taken to a nearby hospital with life-threatening injuries, according to police.  It remains unknown if Cain was armed at the time or not.  Police are currently investigating both the double homicide and the officer-involved shooting.
A Danish town says archaeologists have found some 13,000-year-old hunting tools that give "a fantastic insight" into how some of the first people in Denmark lived.  The municipality of Horsens says in a statement that flint tools, reindeer antlers, "well-preserved flora and fauna relics" and a pike skeleton were found in connection with the construction of a bypass road south of the town some 170 kilometers (106 miles) west of Copenhagen.  Horsens Museum spokeswoman Lone Seeberg said Friday the items, described as "some of the earliest traces of human beings in Denmark," were found in an ice age lake in December.  Explore further: Uber vows to fight in Denmark after law tightened
Welcome to 2nd & Charles in Gainesville, Florida. Looking to sell your books, video games, DVDs, CDs and iPads? You've come to the right place. Looking to buy some used books, video games, DVDs, CDs and iPads? You've also come to the right place! This place is just so right in so many ways.
Doctors Nova Scotia says it's giving credit to the Nova Scotia Health Authority and Health Department for ongoing doctor recruitment efforts, but tackling the shortage will continue to be an uphill battle unless more attention is paid to retaining current physicians.  "This is a looming situation," said Nancy MacCready-Williams, the CEO of Doctors Nova Scotia, a professional and advocacy association that represents more than 3,500 physicians.  Fifty-five per cent of the organization's actively working members are over the age of 50, and she said retirements will continue to grow, especially if physicians are feeling disenfranchised.  There are physicians willing to practise into their senior years, she said, "if some of the issues that prevent them from feeling supported and engaged on the ground were addressed."  'Fragile and at risk'  MacCready-Williams made the comments after provincial health officials updated MLAs at a legislature committee Wednesday on their recruiting efforts.  She pointed to a recent Doctors Nova Scotia report that described province's physician workforce as "fragile and at risk," and which found doctors are feeling burned out just two years into their careers.  "Instead of adding physicians, Nova Scotia is struggling just to retain its current complement of physicians," the report said. "It is challenging to recruit new physicians to the province, and increasingly difficult to get them to stay."  Officials with the health authority and Health Department have stressed the importance of strong community support when recruiting new doctors to the area. But the Doctors Nova Scotia report said health officials also need to rebuild trust so that new doctors won't face frustrated colleagues when they arrive.  So far this fiscal year, 26 new family physicians have started working in Nova Scotia, along with 66 new specialists. There are also 44 pending offers that the Nova Scotia Health Authority says just need to be ironed out.  Dr. Rick Gibson, Dr. Lynne Harrigan and Janet Knox of the Nova Scotia Health Authority on Wednesday addressed efforts to recruit more physicians. (Robert Short/CBC)  The issue of physician compensation also came up during Wednesday's meeting. Liberal MLA Gordon Wilson wanted to know if it was the only factor when it comes to recruiting and retaining staff.  Dr. Lynne Harrigan of the Nova Scotia Health Authority was quick to say it was not at the top of the list.  "When they've done national surveys, the first thing that comes up on the survey is the quality of the place where you're living," said Harrigan.  "The second thing that comes up is the community of physicians that you're working with. Compensation is way down the list. So in spite of it always being focused upon from physicians themselves, it is not the primary thing."  MacCready-Williams disagrees. She said compensation is a significant factor in retention and family physicians in Nova Scotia are some of the lowest paid in the country.  "If they went to New Brunswick or P.E.I. they would make more, so that is a problem," she said. "That is a problem when we are trying to be competitive in having a warm and welcoming environment, and we're competing with other provinces."  'We're at a tipping point'  She also noted comments Harrigan made in an online video just a week earlier where she discussed an announcement about pay for hospitalists, one that will increase the disparity with family doctors.  "We have a system of payment that is inequitable," Harrigan said in the video. "We have the lowest payment for psychiatrists in the country. It's no surprise that we have trouble recruiting psychiatrists in rural areas because of that issue. Our family physicians are amongst the lowest paid in the country."  MacCready-Williams said that confirms a systemic issue that needs to be addressed.  "Right now we're at a tipping point, because many physicians' work-life environment right now is incredibly stressful. We have record rates of burnout and professional dissatisfaction," she said.  "In my six years in this role, I've never seen morale of our community at its lowest as it is right now."
This week Tokyo Disneyland began its 30th anniversary celebrations and the Disney park's Japanese legacy is truly worth celebrating. The resort now encompasses two parks (Disneyland and Disney Sea), three themed hotels and countless rides, restaurants and attractions.  We were lucky enough to visit the park last Halloween and it is one of the world's best kept secrets: the attention to detail, cleanliness and overall experience were absolutely phenomenal. As a tribute we've dedicated this week's Throwback Thursday to Tokyo Disneyland and, from all of us here at Maison Mouse, we wish the park a magical 30th anniversary!  When you enter Disneyland you find yourself in the World Bazaar, as opposed to Main Street, although it is similarly filled with shops and cafes and Cinderella's castle is directly ahead of you. One of the things we loved about the Tokyo park, though, was that the name of each shop and its window displays always reflect what the store sells: in this case, of course, Town Center Fashions is a clothing store.  But before we caught sight of the store's name, we saw its window and could not look away: in the window were life-size versions of four Disney Princess gowns and they were breathtaking. We wished so hard that these dresses were available to buy inside but, sadly (and for obvious reasons), they were display only. The full window scene actually depicts Minnie Mouse (not pictured here) as a seamstress in her sewing room, measuring up a dress for Cinderella, who is peering around the door. Inside the workroom there are dresses for Cinderella, Sleeping Beauty and Snow White (below).  The level of detail in this one window display alone – from the wallpaper to the birds assisting with Cinderella's dress – is incredible, especially when you stop to consider that this is one of the hundreds (if not thousands) of window displays all around the park, each as carefully decorated as the next. We also love the opulent material used to re-create each dress, turning the fantasy on the screen into realistic, period-looking pieces.  Here's one last anecdote we'll share with you about the window displays. Because we were visiting the park for Halloween, almost all the window displays were filled with the most impressive themed decorations. But as the clock struck midnight on 31 October, the entire park transformed from Halloween-themed to Christmas-themed. We know this because we left the park late on the night of the 31st, having fully enjoyed the Halloween celebrations, and when we arrived back at the park on the morning of 1 November every single Halloween decoration (down to the Halloween-themed trashcans) had been removed and most of the park's Christmas decorations were already up, including window displays and stores full of Christmas merchandise. We still have no idea how they did it so fast and in such little time but it was truly magical!
MIT, EDWARD NIEH, KARA PREBREY, AND KAY TYETwo independent research teams have defined populations of neurons in the hypothalamus that are responsible for food-as-reward stimulation, but are likely not necessary to spur eating for survival. Both groups published their findings today (January 29) in Cell.  "These are big papers that start to define the complexity and heterogeneity of [the hypothalamus] and the specific sets of neurons that can produce dramatic behavioral results," said Ralph DiLeone, a neurobiologist at Yale University who was not involved in the work.  Using optogenetics, neuroscientist Garret Stuber at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, and his colleagues found that activating GABAergic neurons within the lateral hypothalamus (LH) led mice to feed more frequently, while inhibiting the activity of these neurons motivated the mice to not eat in excess. These neurons were distinct from other neuronal populations in the LH previously implicated in eating and other reward-related behaviors. When these neurons were genetically ablated, the mice were less motivated to obtain a liquid calorie reward. The scientists also visualized calcium signaling of hundreds of individual GABAergic neurons at once in free-moving mice by implanting microendoscopes into the LH and attaching a miniaturized fluorescence microscope to the animals' heads. The calcium imaging showed distinct populations of GABAergic neurons active upon the first taste of a food reward or when the mice poked their noses—a sign of interest in the food—but rarely during both activities.  In vivo calcium imaging enables researchers to read neuronal activity on a larger scale—in specific regions of the brain, said DiLeone. The technique was developed by Mark Schnitzer's laboratory at Stanford University. "Six years ago, we had none of these technologies—genetic ablation, optogenetics, in vivo imaging," Paul Phillips, a neuroscientist at the University of Washington, told The Scientist. "It's amazing to see the Stuber lab put these together so cleanly to answer important neuroscience questions."  The neurons of the LH are diverse, and known to be involved in reward-related behaviors such as eating, drinking, and sex. But characterizing of the diverse subpopulations of neurons in this brain region has historically been a challenge. "We've had the electrical stimulation findings for more than 30 years now, but we didn't know [which neurons] we were stimulating and whether the feeding-related neurons are from the LH or those that are just passing through until optogenetics techniques became available," said Roy Wise, a neuroscientist at the National Institute on Drug Abuse who was not involved in the work.  "There is excitement in the neuroscience field for in vivo imaging because it allows us, for the first time, to study patterns of activity within molecularly defined subpopulations of neurons," added Stuber.  In the second study, led by MIT neuroscientist Kay Tye, researchers identified two distinct neuronal populations in the circuit connecting the LH and the midbrain's ventral tegmental area (VTA), which is known for its reward-processing function. Whether neurons in these LH-VTA projections respond to sugar itself, or to the act of getting the sugar was not known, said study coauthor Edward Nieh, a graduate student in Tye's laboratory. "Now we know that there are subpopulations of neurons responding to different cues—retrieving the [sugar] and to the [sugar] itself."  Using a variation on an optogenetics technique, the team specifically targeted only the neurons in the LH that link to the VTA. Examining freely moving mice, the team found that the neurons connecting the LH to the VTA were activated during the act of seeking a sugar reward, independent of whether the reward was obtained. Inhibiting this circuit decreased only the compulsive sugar-seeking—not normal feeding behavior—in these mice. Stimulating only the GABAergic neurons in this circuit produced unusual behaviors: the animals gnawed at the floor or empty space in their cages when no food was present. And stimulating these neurons also resulted in classical compulsive behavior of overcoming a punishment—electric shocks—to get to the sugar reward, and increased compulsive overeating.  "We can reduce compulsive sucrose-seeking but not affect their normal feeding," said Nieh. "This is important because for treating compulsive eating behavior, we only want to stop the unhealthy parts of eating and keep normal eating intact."  "There is a clear application to feeding disorders and perhaps drug abuse and gambling because it may be a common pathway that activates these kinds of behaviors," said Phillips.  In an e-mail to The Scientist, Tye said her lab is now working to better define a neuronal signature for craving that could be detected in real-time to develop interventions to stop compulsive overeating and other addictive behaviors before they start.  J.H
(You may have been directed here from www.ke0og.net) You've landed on my ham radio home page. I'm KE��OG, an Extra-Class ham radio operator. I'm active on HF, 2-meters, and 440 MHz. I use this page as an index to ham-radio-related material on this site.   What is ham radio? Watch this video from the Radio Society of Great Britain (RSGB)  Current Geomagnetic Conditions for HF Bands  This chart shows various geomagnetic indicies and what the sun looks like now. These indicies show what HF propagation is like right now. You can use data like this to help you find a good HF band for operations. You can refresh this page to get the latest data.   Becoming a ham radio operator  How I do it (which will be different from the way you do it, but it's sometimes nice to have something to compare to)  Getting on HF with your General Class License – a look at station necessities  Special Techniques  Computer Issues  Miscellany  On-the-air Activities on the Colorado Western Slope  LDS (Mormon) Church ham-related activites  Our monthly "First Sunday" net (anyone can join) Net more or less permanently in hiatus
Veteran St Kilda defender Sam Fisher has called time on a remarkable career spanning 13 seasons, announcing his retirement today.  Taken at pick No. 55 in the 2003 National Draft from West Adelaide, Fisher debuted against Fremantle in Round 7, 2004 and went on to play 228 games in the red, white and black.  Over 13 years, the 34-year-old lined up against some of the best forwards in the competition, receiving All-Australian honours in 2008 as well as winning the Trevor Barker Award in 2008 and 2011.  The St Kilda Life Member said he felt the time was right to hang up the boots and is looking forward to the next stage of his life.  "I've thoroughly enjoyed my time playing for St Kilda Football Club and I can retire knowing that I have given my all over the past 13 years," Fisher said.  "While it will be different supporting from the sidelines, I'm looking forward to seeing my teammates and coaches enjoy well-deserved success in the years to come.  "I don't think anyone imagines they'll play over 200 games but I'm so grateful to have had this experience and would like to thank St Kilda Football Club and the fans for their support over the years."  St Kilda Senior Coach Alan Richardson credited Fisher's service and said he can be proud of his impact both on and off the field.  "Sam arrived at the club before a lot of us, myself included, but he will also leave a legacy that will extend past many of our times at the club," Richardson said.  "While Sam's honours as an All-Australian, Trevor Barker Award Winner and International Rules player highlight the impact he's had on the field he's also taken the opportunity in the last few years to help and teach our young defenders.  "Sam's definitely made his mark on the club, we thank him for his remarkable service and wish him all the best for the future."  After a strong start to the season, a hamstring injury kept Fisher to 12 senior games in 2016, with his final appearance coming in the Saints' Round 23 triumph over Brisbane Lions.  Sam Fisher statistics  Drafted: No. 55, 2003 National Draft  Debut: Round 7, 2004  Matches: 228  Goals: 22  Finals: 13  Grand finals: 3  International Rules Series: 2006  All-Australian: 2008  Trevor Barker Award: 2008, 2011  St Kilda life membership: 2014
Hillary Clinton doesn't believe unborn children should have any Constitutional rights — so it should come as no surprise to pro-life voters that she laughed, stood by and said nothing as someone introducing her at a campaign rally removed "Under God" from the Pledge of Allegiance.  As the Washington Free Beacon reports:  During the introduction for Hillary Clinton at a rally in Blackwood, New Jersey, Susan Shin Angulo, a member of the Camden County Board of Freeholders, messed up the Pledge of Allegiance, a part of which she used in her speech. "Only Hillary can bring us together, as one nation," she started. She then sputtered before skipping the "under God" portion of the pledge. "In-dis-visible, with liberty and justice for all!" she finished. Meanwhile, Clinton just stood there, smiling and nodding.  Watch a clip of what happened:  SIGN THE PLEDGE! We Oppose Hillary Clinton!  During an interview on The View recently Hillary Clinton said an unborn child just hours before delivery should have no Constitutional rights. Her comments came just days after Clinton said unborn children simply do not have any Constitutional rights, which would include the right to life.  In February, Clinton defended partial-birth abortions: "My husband vetoed a very restrictive legislation on late-term abortions, and he vetoed it at an event in the White House where we invited a lot of women who had faced this very difficult decision, that ought to be made based on their own conscience, their family, their faith, in consultation with doctors. Those stories left a searing impression on me," she continued.  Clinton has said more taxpayer money needs to go to the Planned Parenthood abortion business and Clinton demonstrated her unyielding commitment to abortion and the Planned Parenthood abortion business, accepting their endorsement during a pro-abortion rally — saying she would be the abortion business' president.  "I will always defend Planned Parenthood and I will say consistently and proudly, Planned Parenthood should be funded, supported and protected, not undermined, misrepresented and demonized," Clinton said. "As your president, I will always have your back."  At a speech to the Women in the World Conference in April 2015, Hillary Clinton argued, "Far too many women are denied access to reproductive health care (aka. abortion) and safe childbirth, and laws don't count for much if they're not enforced," In order to expand worldwide access to abortion, she suggested that "deep-seated cultural codes, religious beliefs and structural biases have to be changed."  In May 2015, the U.S. House passed the Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act to protect unborn babies 20 weeks and older from excruciating late abortions. In addition to a statement slamming House lawmakers for advancing the bill, Clinton tweeted, "When it comes to women's health, there are two kinds of experts: women and their doctors. True 40+ years ago, true today."  At a presidential forum at Drake University, Clinton called ending the life of another human being a "fundamental human right."  The first order of business for Clinton and her friends at the abortion company is to force Americans to pay for abortions with their tax dollars by attempting to overturn the Hyde Amendment, which has protected Americans from funding most all abortions since the late 1970s. Upheld by the Supreme Court, the Hyde Amendment is now a target of abortion advocates who have moved from pro-choice to pro-abortion — forcing Americans not only to accept unlimited abortions before birth but to pay for them.
Speed kills:A policeman looks at the BMW motorcycle that was involved in an accident in Malleswaram on Wednesday. Anil Kumar (inset).—Photo: V. Sreenivasa Murthy  An actor -turned -realtor was killed on the spot when his motorcycle hit a kerbstone in Malleswaram on Wednesday morning.  The deceased, identified as Anil Kumar, was a resident of BEL Layout in Kamakshiplaya. Anil Kumar had played the lead role in Shivani , a Kannada film released in 2007. He had also acted in many Kannada TV serials before joining his father's real estate business.  On Tuesday night, his father Balram had gone to K.R. Puram on a business meeting. He called his wife and asked her to send him some money through the driver as he wanted to pay his clients.  Anil Kumar volunteered to go and deliver the money to his father. While he was coming back home, his father Balram was following him in his car.  When Anil Kumar reached Malleswaram 17th Cross, he crashed into the kerbs and suffered head injuries. Balram, who was following him, with the help of passersby rushed Anil Kumar to hospital where he died. The police said that Anil Kumar, who got married a year ago, had a fascination for sports bikes and had bought the BMW bike in March.  The Malleswaram traffic police, who are investigating the case, said that due to the impact of the crash, the BMW bike was mangled and the helmet had broken.  The police said that Anil Kumar was riding at over 100 kmph speed when the accident took place.
The collapse of the Indian rupee is just the first of many financial crises that the US Federal Reserve may well trigger with the unwinding of its stimulus policy. Since 2008, the Fed has cut interest rates to zero and tripled its balance sheet. The duration and magnitude of the stimulus is unprecedented. A smaller reversal of the Fed's stimulus in the 1980s triggered the Latin American debt crisis and, in the 1990s, the Asian financial crisis. This time could be worse.  For a decade, India enjoyed the limelight in the BRIC club and received massive inflows of financial capital. The inflows went into its banking system and were lent out as consumer credit. India enjoyed a consumer-led economic boom. Despite much higher inflation than the global average, India's currency also stayed strong.  That, of course, was a typical emerging-market bubble during a global liquidity boom, a by-product of a Fed easing cycle. Even though the Fed is merely signalling the gradual unwinding of its quantitative easing programme and any rate hikes are still far away, India is already crashing. It shows how big the bubble is.  India is a poster child for an emerging-market bubble. It has run big fiscal and current-account deficits for years without being punished by the market. When the liquidity tide is rising, positive stories sell. After 2008, the hot story was the decoupling of emerging economies from the troubles in the West. It justified pouring trillions of dollars into them.  The hot money, as shown in India's case, pushed up growth but also created a bubble. India is just the first to be exposed. Many more will follow in the coming months.  Some economies haven't run big current-account or fiscal deficits and yet have experienced a credit bubble under the same forces. Hot money inflates credit growth. If that credit goes into activities that don't require too many imports, the bubble just distorts allocation of the expenditure. China, for example, has seen a massive increase in property investment, yet consumption has been depressed. Deflation would be required to shift the allocation back. That would leave behind many bad loans, proportional to the misallocations over the years.  The problems around the world could scare investors into running to the US … a sort of bubble yo-yo  Trouble spots may occur in unsuspecting places. East Asia, Hong Kong, South Korea and Malaysia have experienced unusually high rises in household debt levels. This has raised alarms. But, as the levels kept rising, the warnings lost credibility.  The Nordic countries have seen even higher household debt levels. They have bizarre mortgage products to rival the worst during the US bubble. Australia, a vast country with a small population, has crazy property prices. There have been many abnormalities around the world over the past six years. The odds are that they are bubbles and will burst on the Fed's reversal.  Devaluation or deflation: that is the choice for many economies. Devaluation seems preferable on the surface. It inflates away the excess credit creation. Hot money suffers because of exchange rate losses on the way out.  But, devaluation may cause widespread panic and turn into hyperinflation. Indonesia and Russia, for example, suffered this fate in 1998. A political crisis inevitably follows hyperinflation. Recovery could be a very long road after such events.  Deflation will probably cause a banking crisis. But, when the political situation is already fragile, it may be the only choice. A banking crisis could be handled through recapitalisation, funded with fiscal borrowing. As the economy recovers, the government could recoup all its money. An added benefit is that deflation bankrupts those who were most aggressive during the bubble. Such people are usually hell-bent on redistribution games, not value creation. Their demise would create space for new and value-adding businesses.  Devaluation would save these parasites who would continue to engage in redistribution. Deflation may be more painful now, but there would definitely be more gain later.  "The dollar is our currency, but your problem," former US Treasury secretary John Connally said four decades ago. The US economy was so dominant in the global economy that others couldn't influence US monetary policy. But the US is much smaller now. If a large number of economies go down because of the Fed's unwinding, the US may suffer so much that it could be forced to change its policy.  The future is more uncertain this time. There are two scenarios ahead. First, the problems around the world could scare investors into running to the US. Hence, despite a weakening global economy, the US would remain strong.  Of course, this would be a bubble; a sort of global bubble yo-yo - first, the hot money left the US and went into emerging economies in 2008. A few years down the road, the situation reverses.  Second, the US economy could dive due to the crises elsewhere. The Fed would
In the market for an 80 percent lower? The 80 lower receiver is a vital component for any do-it-yourself AR-15 or AR 10 build. An 80 percent lower receiver provides the builder an opportunity to complete their own custom AR-15 rifle or pistol without any paperwork or FFL (Federal Firearm License) transfer. By definition of the law, an 80% lower receiver is NOT considered a firearm since it is not 100% completed. By design, the 80 percent lower still requires the builder to complete the last 20% of milling. Typically, the completion of an 80% lower is accomplished using an 80 lower jig.  While the 80 percent lower receiver allows a builder to complete a firearm themselves, this also allows the builder to build a rifle or pistol that does not require registration with the government since no serialization is required (although recommended). You can simply order an 80% lower and we send it right to you without any of that clunky government oversight.  There are several types of 80 percent lower receivers available to AR builders. The types of 80% lowers that are popular in the AR enthusiast community are the: AR15 80 lower, AR10 80 lower, billet lower receiver, forged lower receiver and 80 lower jig kit. Each type of 80 percent lower provides its own benefits, but, ultimately, depends on what the builder is looking for in their AR 10, AR 15 rifle or AR 15 Pistol build.  Benefits of an 80 Percent Lower:  - No FFL required  - No serialization required  - Minimal technical skills required to complete  - Maintains the custom integrity of your build  - Corrosion-resistant aluminum  - Manufactured from 7075 aerospace aluminum alloy  - CNC machined to Mil-Spec standards  - Made in the USA  Your build awaits.
This remarkable New Jersey poet-physician established an American kind of poem distinct from European forms. His work demonstrates an innovative use of common objects and experience as topics for poems as well as formal experiments with the cadences of actual American speech. View a video clip of the William Carlos Williams poem "The Great Figure". Academy of American Poets Hear Williams read "To Elsie" and find a concise Williams biography, a connection to Allen Ginsberg sites, and more at the Academy of American Poets' site on Williams. Beinecke Rare Book & Manuscript Library of Yale University "I see bare branches laden with snow." For an interesting exhibition on the influence of Chinese art and poetry on Williams and other writers, visit the online version of "Petals on a Wet Black Bough: American Modernist Writers and the Orient," presented by the Beinecke Rare Book & Manuscript Library of Yale University. The Atlantic Monthly: "Can Poetry Matter?" "It is...time to restore a vulgar vitality to poetry...," says Dana Gioia in "Can Poetry Matter?" from The Atlantic Monthly (May 1991). Gioia says that a passage from Williams's "Asphodel, That Greeny Flower" provides a possible starting point for poets to persuade readers that poetry still matters.
The Ontario government is likening a proposed Christian law school's requirement of no sexual intimacy outside of heterosexual marriage to a bar against Jews that existed in the province's legal profession nearly 200 years ago.  Ontario says it has insisted that access to the profession be open to all, beginning in 1833, when it abolished a requirement that effectively barred non-Christian lawyers through an insistence on receiving the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, a Christian ritual. In 1892, Clara Brett Martin became the province's first female lawyer, with the support of the Attorney-General.  "Ontarians have a right to expect that they or their children can seek to become lawyers without facing impediments because of their religion, gender or sexual orientation," the province says in a written filing with the Supreme Court.  Story continues below advertisement  Globe editorial: At Trinity Western, a delicate balance between religious freedom and freedom from discrimination  The court has set aside two days this fall to hear arguments on whether law societies in Ontario and British Columbia may refuse to license graduates of Trinity Western University's proposed law school in Langley, B.C.  The private university, established in 1962, has a "Community Covenant" obliging students to sign a promise not to engage in sexual activity outside of heterosexual marriage. Law societies in both provinces voted against licensing the graduates, calling the school discriminatory. B.C.'s Court of Appeal overturned one such rejection, while Ontario's top court upheld the other.  Ontario is the only government intervening in the case. In all, a record 26 intervenors are scheduled to appear, after the court added a day for the hearing, and in an unprecedented move granted permission to 17 intervenors it had earlier rejected.  In its legal filing, Trinity Western says the law societies are discriminating against its graduates on the grounds of religious freedom. Such discrimination, it says, harms all religious minorities by forbidding them from joining together to express their beliefs.  Barring its graduates "removes the option for members of the evangelical community to attend a law school that respects, encourages and supports their beliefs."  If the law societies are correct in refusing to recognize Trinity Western, the school says, "the Charter [of Rights and Freedoms] does not adequately protect the ability of all religious educational communities-schools, churches and other organizations to obtain required state approvals and recognition to carry out their private activities in the context of their protected religious beliefs."  Story continues below advertisement  Story continues below advertisement  TWU was established by the Evangelical Free Church, and describes evangelicals as a distinct religious subculture in Canada, amounting to 11 per cent or 12 per cent of the population.  "Evangelical Christianity is a minority religious group, having distinctive religious beliefs, including an emphasis on practising the beliefs and moral standards expressed in the Bible. These beliefs and practices can put its members in tension with broader societal norms and popular opinion."  An intervenor that supports TWU's position, the Christian Legal Fellowship, argues that the law societies are wrong when they say they are acting in the public interest by refusing to accept graduates of the law school.  "The public interest is not a sword to enforce moral conformity with the Law Societies' approved values," it says in a filing with the Supreme Court. A blanket exclusion based on the Community Covenant casts unwarranted aspersions on all lawyers with traditional beliefs, it adds.  Two same-sex advocacy groups, Start Proud and OUTlaws, say in a joint filing that the Community Covenant means LGBTQ persons, including married ones, "can never be their authentic selves while attending TWU. … No one should be forced to renounce their dignity and self-respect in order to obtain an education."  The Law Society of Upper Canada, the self-regulating body for the legal profession in Ontario, says it cannot discriminate directly or indirectly.  Story continues below advertisement  "The Law Society's accreditation of TWU would have amounted to the Law Society condoning TWU's discriminatory policy and exhibiting a preference for the religious tenets of Evangelical Christianity," it said in its written argument filed with the Supreme Court.
Subjects  Forty-six healthy adults (right-handed, 23 male, age range 21–50 years, 18–30 BMI) were recruited in response to study advertisements. They reported habitual nightly sleep durations between 6.5 h–8.5 h, habitual bedtimes between 2200h–0000h, and habitual awakenings between 0600h–0900h; these reports were confirmed objectively using actigraphy. They had no evidence of habitual napping, no sleep disturbances and an absence of extreme morningness or extreme eveningness, assessed by questionnaire61. Subjects were free of acute or chronic medical and psychological conditions, as established by interviews, clinical history, questionnaires, physical examinations and blood (including a fasting blood glucose test) and urine tests. They were nonsmokers and did not participate in shift work, transmeridian travel, or irregular sleep-wake routines in the 60 days prior to the study. Enrolled subjects were monitored at home with actigraphy, sleep-wake diaries, and time-stamped call-ins to assess bedtime and waketime during the week before and after the in-laboratory phase. They were not permitted to use caffeine, alcohol, tobacco and medications (except oral contraceptives) in the week before the laboratory study, as verified by urine screenings. Sleep disorders were excluded by a night of laboratory polysomnography and oximetry measurements.  The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the University of Pennsylvania. All subjects provided written informed consent before enrollment, which was in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Subjects were compensated for participating in the study.  Experimental Design  Subjects were screened twice prior to participating in the study; training in a mock MRI scanner occurred during the second screening session. During the study, subjects remained in the laboratory at the Clinical Translational Research Center at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania for 5 consecutive days (4 consecutive nights). Subjects arrived at the laboratory in the afternoon and were provided 9 h time-in-bed (TIB) for their baseline sleep night (Figure 6). The first functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scan session took place the next morning (Baseline [BL] day) from 0700h–1000h. Subjects were then randomized to either a total sleep deprivation (TSD) or control condition. During the second night of the study, sleep-deprived subjects were kept awake and control subjects were allowed 8 h TIB to sleep (Figure 6). The second fMRI scan session took place the next morning (total sleep deprivation [TSD] day or control day 1 [CD1]). Sleep-deprived subjects were then allowed 12 TIB for recovery sleep and control subjects were allowed 8 h TIB to sleep (Figure 6). Each subject was scanned at the same time for each scan to avoid potential time-of-day differences between scans.  Figure 6: Protocol summary. Subjects arrived at the laboratory in the afternoon and were provided 9h time-in-bed (TIB) for their baseline sleep night. The first functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scan session took place the next morning (Baseline [BL] day) from 0700h-1000h. Subjects were then randomized to either a total sleep deprivation (TSD) or control condition. During the second night of the study, sleep-deprived subjects were kept awake and control subjects were allowed 8 h TIB to sleep. The second fMRI scan session took place the next morning from 0700h-1000h (total sleep deprivation [TSD] day or control day 1 [CD1]). Sleep-deprived subjects were then allowed 12 TIB for recovery sleep and control subjects were allowed 8 h TIB to sleep. Each subject was scanned at the same time for each scan to avoid potential time-of-day differences between scans. Subjects had ad libitum to food/drink during the study. Subjects remained in the laboratory for the duration of the study and were monitored by trained staff at all times to ensure adherence to the protocol. Full size image  Subjects were behaviorally monitored by trained staff continuously to ensure adherence and were not permitted to leave the laboratory during the study. Subjects were ambulatory and were allowed to watch television, read, play video or board games, and perform other sedentary activities between test bouts (which were completed while sitting at the computer) but they were not allowed to exercise. Subjects wore a wrist actigraph throughout the study and wore ambulatory electroencephalography and electrocardiography recording equipment for 24-h intervals. The light levels were held constant at <50 lux during scheduled wakefulness and <1 lux during scheduled sleep periods. Ambient temperature was maintained between 22°–24°C. Food/drink was ad libitum throughout the protocol (caffeine was prohibited).  Measures  Subjects selected their meals/snacks by choosing from various menu options, and by making requests to
Historically, most web designers and their clients have approached the desktop side of any project first, while leaving the mobile part as a secondary goal that gets accomplished later. Even with the rise of responsive design, many of us begin with the "full size" site and work our way down.  There's a growing trend in the industry though to flip this workflow on its head and actually begin with mobile considerations and then work up to a larger desktop version. Why would you ever approach a project this way? What are some of the pros and cons of this strategy? Read on to find out!  This article is part of our series on "looking beyond desktop design", brought to you in partnership with Heart Internet VPS.  Mobile Web Design Isn't a Niche  If you still have it in your head that mobile web design and application development is a niche industry, you need to change your way of thinking. Mobile isn't a trend, nor is it even the future, it's the present. Don't believe me? Here are some crazy statistics to consider from Mobithinking from last month.  There are over 1.2 billion mobile web users worldwide  mobile web users worldwide In the U.S., 25% of mobile Web users are mobile-only (they rarely use a desktop to access the web)  Mobile apps have been downloaded 10.9 billion times  Mobile device sales are increasing across the board with over 85 percent of new handsets able to access the mobile Web  One of the most potent facts here is the second item, which brings to light that many users will likely only ever see the mobile version of your site. That's an astounding revelation isn't it?  More than ever before the web is something that we carry in our pockets, not something that merely hangs out near our desk or even in our homes. This is a global trend that will only continue to see growth in the coming years. Are you ready for this? Does your professional skill set include web development for all important platforms or just the desktop arena?  Why Mobile First?  Odds are none of the people reading this have learned anything new up to this point. The $200+ phones in the pockets of everyone you know are all the indication you need that the web has broken out of its computer shaped box.  However, the fact that mobile web access is popular does almost nothing to convince me that I need to pursue a strategy that actually puts mobile first. The flip side of 25% of mobile users being mobile-only is that 75% of them aren't! Obviously, the desktop is still an important medium, not to be forgotten or pushed to the back burner quite yet. So why are we even considering taking the mobile first route?  One of the major catalysts for the rise of mobile first web design was the announcement from Eric Schmidt in 2010 that Google was going to be taking this approach from now on, going so far as to say "I think it's now the joint project of all of us to make mobile the answer to pretty much everything" (source). Why this drastic change in approach?  Graceful Degradation vs. Progressive Enhancement  These are some major buzz words from a few years ago that can still lend a lot of insight into the notion of mobile first web design and why it's an important concept to consider.  Graceful degradation arose out of a need to have a design function on as many browsers and platforms as possible. Designers and developers wanted to take advantage of new technology without excluding users with setups that didn't have support. The general conclusion was to create and serve up the best experience possible, and then account for each possible degradation and ensure that despite any shortcomings, the site would remain functional.  In terms of mobile web design, this meant that a full, standard website would scale back and gradually remove content and features as the viewport became smaller and the system simpler (no Flash support, etc.).  Out of this trend arose a powerful new idea: progressive enhancement. In this version of the tale, you put your best foot forward on the mobile platform, providing the users with minimal screen real estate, processing power and third party plugins an amazing experience that both looks great and functions perfectly. As the need arises, the site can gradually be "enhanced" and even completely rethought for larger platforms with fewer constraints.  Why Progressive Enhancement Wins  At a glance, these two methodologies seem roughly equivalent. Who cares where you begin the design process as long as it gets done, right?  The reality of the situation is a little more complex though. When you start with the desktop platform, you tend want to take advantage of everything that platform has to offer. You build an amazing product that leverages lots of great technology, only to realize that none of it scales well down to mobile. This can and does lead to severely watered down mobile products that feel more like an afterthought than a polished, finished
President Barack Obama accuses Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump of "whining," after his repeated statements on the upcoming presidential election being "rigged."  At a joint news conference with Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi, Obama says:  The notion that somehow if Mr. Trump loses Florida, it's because of those people that you have to watch out for, that is both irresponsible and, by the way, doesn't really show the kind of leadership and toughness that you want out of a president. If you start whining before the game's even over, if whenever things are going badly for you and you lose, you start blaming somebody else, then you don't have what it takes to be in this job because there are a lot of times when things don't go our way or my way.  However, as a presidential candidate Obama expressed concerns about the validity of U.S. elections. On numerous occasions before being sworn in as commander-in-chief, Obama decried flaws in the American election system, which included voter ID laws, rhetoric from Bush administration Justice Department officials and the agency's traditional handling of voter fraud investigations. In 2008, shortly before the general election, Obama even had acknowledged that elections had been "monkeyed" with in the past.  1) October 20, 2006 – Barack Obama in a joint press release with Rep. John Lewis and then-Sen. Chris Dodd (D-CT) accused the Georgia State Board of Elections of a "cynical attempt" to influence elections when a letter was inadvertently sent out telling voters to bring "proper government-issued photo identification" to the polls shortly after a Georgia Superior Court judge ruled the requirement violated the state constitution.  Partial press statement:  Today Rep. John Lewis (D-GA), and Senators Chris Dodd (D-CT) and Barack Obama (D-IL) sent a letter to U.S. Attorney General Alberto Gonzalez requesting federal investigation of an action taken by the Georgia State Board of Elections. The elections board sent out over 200,000 letters informing voters in mainly Democratic districts that they may not have the proper government-issued photo identification required to vote in the November 7th election. That letter would have been appropriate had a Superior Court judge in Fulton County not ruled last month that the Georgia photo-ID law violated the state constitution. A prominent GOP member of the elections board contended the letters were slated for delivery before the judge's ruling, but evidence released from the secretary of state's office reveals the letters were sent to the post office after the judge issued his decision. Former Gov. Roy Barnes has filed a lawsuit against the state over the matter, and Rep. Lewis joined Senators Dodd and Obama requesting a federal investigation of the mailing to determine whether voting rights laws were broken. … "This seems like nothing more than a cynical attempt to influence elections by discouraging people to vote," Sen. Obama said. "It's crucial that we vigorously defend American citizens' right to vote, and this matter should be thoroughly investigated as soon as possible."  2) September 28, 2007 – Then-Sen. Barack Obama address gives remarks at the Howard University convocation in Washington, DC. In the speech to the audience at the HBCU, Obama vowed to scale back voter-fraud investigations in black and Latino districts and pursue investigations into voter suppression if elected president.  Remarks:  Like Katrina did with poverty, Jena exposed glaring inequities in our justice system that were around long before that schoolyard fight broke out. It reminds us of the fact that we have a system that locks away too many young, first-time, non-violent offenders for the better part of their lives – a decision that's made not by a judge in a courtroom, but by politicians in Washington. It reminds us that we have certain sentences that are based less on the kind of crime you commit than on what you look like and where you come from. It reminds us that we have a Justice Department whose idea of prosecuting civil rights violations is trying to rollback affirmative action programs at our college and universities; a Justice Department whose idea of prosecuting voting rights violations is to look for voting fraud in black and Latino communities where it doesn't exist. We know these inequities are there. We know they're wrong. And yet they go largely unnoticed until people find the courage to stand up and say they're wrong. Until someone finally says, "It's wrong that Scooter Libby gets no jail time for compromising our national security, but a 21-year-old honor student is still sitting in a Georgia prison for something that wasn't even a felony. That's wrong." … From the day I take office as President, America will have a Justice Department that is truly dedicated to the work it began in the days after Little Rock. I will rid the department of ideologues and political cronies, and for the first time in eight years, the Civil Rights Division will actually be staffed with civil rights lawyers who prosecute civil rights violations, and employment discrimination
Tega Brain, This tutorial was made by the Education Working Group, during the p5.js contributor conference at the Frank-Ratchye Studio for Creative Inquiry, Carnegie Mellon University in May of 2015. The contributors to this tutorial include Jason Alderman Taeyoon Choi and Luisa Pereira  This is a field guide for debugging for everyone—whether you are beginning to code or whether you have been coding for a long time, this guide breaks down the mysterious process of solving problems.  0. Debugging is a Creative Act  At all levels, programmers encounter bugs and will often spend more time debugging than actually programming the application. You can expect to spend a lot of time doing this and so it is important to develop good strategies for identifying and working through bugs as you learn to program in p5.js. A bug is a gap between what you think your system is doing, and what it is actually doing. Clay Shirky aptly describes a bug as "the moment when there is both a technical problem with your code as well as a problem with your mental picture of what is happening in your code." You think you are telling the computer one thing, but it is doing something else. It may also be crashing or throwing errors. In order to close the gap, you must investigate. When you are working on a project, you may play many different roles. You are an architect when designing and planning your program, an engineer when you are developing it. Then you will be an explorer, discovering the problems and errors and testing it in all the situations in which it needs to run. You are trying to find out where it might break. Finally, when debugging you are a detective, trying to figure out how and why things broke. So how can you become a good detective and debug your program? Here are the ten steps that can help you become a good code sleuth.  1. Change Perspectives.  Don't panic. When you encounter a bug that you do not know how to solve, stop, pause and take a deep breath. Stand up, say hi to the dog, take a walk or if it's late go get some sleep. When you are frustrated, tired and upset, you are not in a good frame of mind to learn or solve a problem. To find your errors you will need to change perspectives and become the detective. The goal is to find out what the program IS doing, rather than why it's not doing what it's supposed to. We need to get the computer to show us what it's doing. The clues are in the values of variables and flow of program.  2. Observe the problem  Walk someone through the issue even if they themselves do not know how to program. If no one is around, draft an email explaining what you have done and breaking down what the problem is. You probably won't need to actually send this email as often the act of writing it will help you to locate and identify what you need to do next. Some programmers have even been known to explain their problem to a friendly inanimate object like a rubber ducky. This is also a good time to add comments to your code that tell you exactly what each of your functions is doing. Some coders also print out their code (or a section of it) and go through it line by line, tracing the path of variables and making notes.  3. Before you start...  Before doing anything, save a copy of your code that you can go back to. While debugging you are likely to introduce other problems, break things or accidentally delete good work. You don't want to make bigger bugs in the process of debugging. If you make a mistake or your problem gets more worse, you can always UNDO or revert back to your saved file. You can try version control such as GitHub. Write a list of what you are trying, so you can keep track of what still needs to be checked. Be methodical, it will save you a lot of time in the long run. Only ever change one thing at a time. As you debug, you will be turning parts of your code on and off. Every time you make a change, test your program. If you make multiple changes before testing, you will not know which change has what effect and are likely to break things further.  4. Check the basics  Many bugs end up being very basic mistakes, equivalent to forgetting to plug in the power cord. These mistakes are so obvious they are often invisible. Check the dumb stuff like... Are you editing the file that you are actually running (and not, for example, editing the local file, and looking at a different file on the server)?  Are all of your external files where you think they are?  Are your file dependencies correct?  Are there any typos in your paths?  Check your server? etc.  5. Black boxes  A black box describes any part of your system you do not understand the
San Francisco First City in the Nation to Count Its Parking Spaces  Meters along the Embarcadero are part of the Port of San Francisco's SFPark trial. Photo: Matthew Roth  No sizable city in the country, or likely the world, has been able to say with any certainty how many parking spaces it has, public or private, until now. Over the last 18 months, the San Francisco Municipal Transportation Agency (MTA) has tallied every publicly accessible parking space within city limits, including free and metered spaces on-street and every publicly accessible garage [PDF map].  The total number of spaces, as Mayor Gavin Newsom recently announced on his Youtube site, is 441,541. Of the total, over 280,000 are on-street spaces, 25,000 of which are metered. For just the on-street spaces, that is roughly the equivalent area of Golden Gate Park.  "Most cities have very little knowledge of their parking inventory," said Rachel Weinberger, a planning professor at the University of  Pennsylvania and former transportation policy adviser to New York Mayor  Michael Bloomberg. Weinberger called the parking census a "tremendous effort."  "Without the basic knowledge [city planners] have no basis on which to make  decisions about future supply policy, about current management policy or  even about how their transportation systems are working."  Don Shoup, planning professor at UCLA and author of the definitive book on the history of parking, The High Cost of Free Parking, was excited to hear the  news. "San Francisco's census of parking spaces is a great achievement, and the  first of its kind anywhere," he said.  The release of the public parking space census coincides with the redesign of the website for SFPark, an occupancy-based parking management trial funded with a $19.8 million federal congestion mitigation grant, which among many objectives, seeks to manage the supply of parking by adjusting the cost to match demand. To put that in laymen's terms, if SFPark works well, there should be enough parking at the curb so that drivers don't have to circle the block endlessly searching for that elusive space. By gradually adjusting the price of parking up or down in the pilot areas, the city expects to create roughly one or two free spaces per block face at any time, the original purpose of parking meters when they were introduced in the 1930s.  Jay Primus, who directs the SFPark trial for the MTA, said the parking census was the first step toward a better understanding of how parking works in San Francisco, filling a void where city planners could only make rough estimates previously. "If you can't manage what you can't count, doing a careful survey and documenting all publicly available parking was a critical first step for the MTA for how we manage parking more intelligently," he said.  Primus explained that his team combed through copious records to determine total public garage spaces, including the MTA's own facilities and city tax records for private facilities. For on-street unmetered spaces, he sent interns out across the city to count every fifth block, a 20 percent sample size. At every free opportunity, he sends out more interns and recently estimated they had increased their sample size to 35 percent. Time willing, he hoped to count every single space on every street.  Aside from satisfying his own penchant for good data, Primus said the data was essential if they expect the SFPark pilots to succeed in making parking more convenient for drivers and reducing traffic.   Click image to enlarge. Map depicting SFPark trial areas. Courtesy: sfpark.org  In order to expand the impact of the data, the MTA has released it to third-party developers on the Data SF Website, which the agency hopes will spur creative applications for smart phones much as software engineers have done  with the MTA's route and schedule information. With these applications, Primus expected to "see less circling for parking, less  wasted fuel, and reduced greenhouse-gas emissions. It could help to save people  both time and money," he said.  "San Francisco is on the forefront of parking management," said Mayor  Newsom, who has championed open data through DataSF. "By combining this data with our innovative approach to local  government open data, we continue to transform government to work better  for all of us."  Beyond the benefits to drivers and the savings from reduced congestion, the parking census data will inform the general discussion of parking supply and development, which can become highly contentious and emotional.  Jason Henderson, a San Francisco State University Geography Professor, said San Francisco Planning Commission hearings sometimes devolve into unhelpful arguments over the supply of parking without good data to back up either side's assertions.  "It's very important to have as fact-based a conversation as possible," said Henderson.
Obamacare Repeal Would Add Billions to Deficit  Enlarge this image toggle caption Don Ryan/AP Don Ryan/AP  Congress' official scorekeeper says repealing Obamacare would increase the federal budget deficit and the number of uninsured Americans by 24 million.  The report from the Congressional Budget Office comes as Washington awaits a ruling by the Supreme Court that could end insurance subsidies for some six million people in 30 states.  The report says repealing the Affordable Care Act's spending cuts and tax increases would add $137 billion to the deficit over the next ten years, and the number of people with health insurance would drop from 90 percent of the population to 82 percent.  The CBO says economic growth would be boosted a bit because more people would join the labor force, as the Affordable Care Act's subsidies make it easier for people to work less or stop working and not lose health coverage.  Reaction to the report, as with most things about the health care law, fell along party lines. The chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, Republican Mike Enzi of Wyoming, chose to focus on how repeal would effect economic growth:  "'CBO has determined what many in Congress have known all along,' said Chairman Enzi. 'This law acts as an anchor on our economy by dragging down employment and reducing labor force participation. As a result, the deficit reduction that the Democrats promised when it was enacted is substantially unclear.'"  Democrats put their focus on the negative impacts of repeal. House Minority leader Nancy Pelosi said:  "The cost to the deficit would be surpassed only by the human toll of repeal. Republicans would add over 20 million Americans to the ranks of the uninsured, and strip vital health protections from hundreds of millions of American families – shattering the newfound health security that has made a difference in the lives of so many families. Republicans should look at the numbers and finally end their fixation with repealing this historic law."  The new CBO report incorporates the principles of dynamic scoring, which takes into account a wider array of economic factors, and which Republicans say provides a more realistic picture of the economic impact of repeal. The CBO says under the old rules, the deficit would increase even more, by $353 billion over ten years.  Politico says the CBO report could have political implications:  "The estimate will make it harder for Republicans to use so-called reconciliation to repeal the law because congressional budgeting rules bar lawmakers from using the parliamentary maneuver to move legislation that adds to government red ink.  The CBO report said over the long term, repeal would add even more to the deficit:
There is ranting, foul language, triggering conversation about bodies and sexual violence, and various manners of voodoo and black magic in this blog post. Consider yourself warned.  Victim blaming. The idea that a victim has culpability in being victimized. Hold on to that definition for a minute.  We'd been sitting on the phone for a little over an hour, at this point. I laid sprawled out across my bed, nail file in hand, beaten-up cell phone attached to my face, listening to him talk. I'm not entirely sure what I thought he might be doing on the other end of the phone, but I remember the point where I legitimately stopped "half-listening" and had to sit up, anxiety overpowering my obsessive desire for perfectly straight nails.  "I mean, it's hard to say it, but I've been raped before."  "Wait, what?" There was a long pause before I could finish. "What happened?"  Apparently, as a basketball player in school, he went home with one of his team mates to spend the night at his house instead of going home. That night, sleeping on the couch, he woke up to find a woman – his friend's mother – on top of him, taking advantage of the fact that he'd developed an erection in his sleep. He was terrified, confused, and – I could tell – crushed: this was his "first time."  He never told his mother. She'd never understand. Men don't get raped. Men do the raping, right? She'd simply tell him to never speak of it again… so he figured he'd get a jump start on that and not speak on it at all. This left him with countless misunderstanding about masculinity, his place in society, and whether or not he should trust his own body. It led him to misunderstand what "signals" are and what part of himself allowed this to happen.  He was a kid who got a hard-on in his sleep. That's it.  As I recall this unfortunate story, I sit here, right now, with my jaw completely and totally in my hands. I am dumbfounded.  Across my screen flew this link, and I immediately felt anxiety all across my chest, my arms and down my spine.  A few…quotes… of… interest:  It seems as if the considerable push back again victim-blaming has pushed all the way past prudence and levelheadedness, making anyone who suggests that "women can actually be taught how to behave too" insensitive or a "rape enabler."  …as the article continues, and lines such as "Consent can be withdrawn by the words "no "or "stop" and in many states, a woman doesn't have to say no at all. Consumption of alcohol can prevent a woman from being able to legally offer consent" begin to seep in, the tone seems to shift from "men need to take full responsibility for their actions" to "men need to take full responsibility for their actions…and women have carte blance to act as recklessly and stupidly around men as possible without any trace of accountability." and I just can't agree anymore.  Sparkling little beauties, those quotes.  I look at those quotes, and I am astounded by the naivete they display.  People far more eloquent than myself have commented on the foolishness of telling victims (and potential victims) that they have some culpability in their ability to be victimized. I'd be a fool to re-mow that neatly manicured lawn.  However, I think we need to fully understand what the world looks like in a space where it is acceptable to tell people that they can protect themselves from being raped. It's easy to talk about the immediate consequences of a society that thinks that women invite attack by "dressing like sluts" or by "drinking too much" (and yes, I am saying "women" on purpose, despite the story above) and how wrong-headed that thinking is, but what does the world look like when you are told to live in constant fear of being victimized?  You know what it looks like? It looks like young girls, suffering from the advances of grown men who should know and be encouraged to do better, who carry their books across their chest because their breasts attract too much attention. It looks like Mothers of young girls, buying their pre-teen and teenaged daughters giant sweaters to wear to try to hide their breasts, because they "know the boys will stare." And, right now, as someone says, "Of course they will stare!" I have to wonder – do we even bother to tell our boys (and, hell, grown men, too) how wrong that is? That no, it is not simply "hormones" and "natural urges" to gawk at and objectify a young
Written by Melissa Jouben  My initial impressions of GLOW based mostly on the plot synopsis was very positive. The idea of a television show centered on the backstage world of professional wrestling has been shockingly overlooked, given the fact it seems to be more popular than ever, and as a woman who grew up enjoying wrestling this show sits at a near-perfect crossroads of my interests. It's a comedy about professional wrestling, starring a diverse and mostly female cast? I was on board with this from the moment it was greenlit!  For the entirety of the first episode, we hear other characters telling Ruth (Alison Brie) constantly how "real" she is, but we never get the opportunity to personally see it and, personally, I don't initially buy it. I don't think Ruth sees it, either. A casting director tells her she's the kind of "real" actress movie directors think they're looking for (until they see her and realize they don't), and the man she sleeps with tells her this several times during sex. But whereas these characters seem to think of her as centered or maybe in-tune with herself, all we see is a grown woman borrowing money from her parents for what she claims will be the last time, eating Cinnamon Toast Crunch for every meal, making her instructor fall asleep during line reading class, and sleeping with her best friend's husband. She is clearly passionate about acting, but the biggest thing holding her back from achieving meaningful success is herself.  The name Ruth is kind of fitting for her; she's ruthless, but not in a positive sense. She's driven entirely by desperation and neediness, a desire to be liked and to be validated, and she'll stop at almost nothing for it. Her best friend Debbie (Betty Gilpin), a former actress who happily left the profession to get married and start a family, urges Ruth to rethink her priorities and maybe even follow her own life path. Ruth is just barely able to decline her suggestion with politeness.Instead she goes home and has sex with Debbie's husband.  Right as she appears to be at the end of her rope, Ruth gets a phone call from the casting director she earlier accosted in a bathroom (to ask for feedback on how to be more likeable and therefore land more acting jobs, naturally) telling her about an open casting call for "unconventional women." Ruth shows up without any trepidation and learns that the casting is for a new show called GLOW – Gorgeous Ladies of Wrestling. The actresses are the wrestlers. The wrestlers are actresses. Ruth is desperate and continues on, despite the fact that one of the masterminds behind GLOW, Sam (Marc Maron) sees right through Ruth and is unimpressed. Or maybe he doesn't see through her, but he's still unimpressed. It's unclear, but what IS clear is that Ruth is approaching the whole thing with her trademark sense of desperation, and it isn't winning her any favors in Sam's eyes.  Ruth's efforts to be liked and stay liked throughout the episode are so embarrassing to watch that they're almost painful. When Sam cuts Ruth during rehearsals as punishment for trying to add flourish to her performance and improvise a ridiculous backstory that her character is in trouble for stealing a loaf of bread, you're almost glad that the characters in the show hated the whole thing as much as you did. And when she goes home to study professional wrestling and comes back the next day in full costume, reciting a monologue from "Cat on a Hot Tin Roof" in the style of Hulk Hogan, you can appreciate what she's going for while also wanting her to stop, immediately. Fortunately her drive to be liked wins her a part on the show, but not because she impresses anyone with her performance or her stage presence.  Instead, her show is cut short by her best friend Debbie, who has learned that Ruth slept with her husband Mark (Rich Sommer, one of Alison Brie's Mad Men co-stars). Debbie is furious and storms the gym to confront Ruth, who is downright resistant to the idea of any real confrontation. As Sam watches Debbie enter the ring and decide the only way she'll feel better is to kick Ruth's ass, he begins to daydream about the two of them as professional Gorgeous Ladies of Wrestling – in full costume, surrounded by screaming fans. It seems like the chemistry between these two women is exactly what he's been looking for, and as Ruth looks at Sam while Debbie pins her to the ring, she can tell she's finally going to get that validation she was after, just not the way she wanted it.  Debbie's entrance is a little bit of a dues ex machina moment, although I've always taken the stance that dues ex machina is a fine device, as long as the payoff is satisfying. And I think that watching Debbie kick Ruth's ass was satisfying for two reasons; one, of course, is that we really
Crossref Citations  This article has been cited by the following publications. This list is generated based on data provided by CrossRef.  Dune, Tinashe 2015. Development and the Politics of Human Rights. p. 223.  Bernstein, Mary 2013. The Sociology of Sexualities: Taking Stock of the FieldTemporarily Yours: Intimacy, Authenticity, and the Commerce of Sex, by BernsteinElizabeth. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2007. 291pp. $27.50 paper. ISBN: 9780226044583.The Straight State: Sexuality and Citizenship in Twentieth-Century America, by CanadayMargot. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2009. 277pp. $19.95 paper. ISBN: 9780691149936.The Sexuality of Migration: Border Crossings and Mexican Immigrant Men, by CantúLionel. New York, NY: NYU Press, 2009. 245pp. $23.00 paper. ISBN: 9780814758496.Black Sexual Politics: African Americans, Gender, and the New Racism, by CollinsPatricia Hill. New York, NY: Routledge, 2005. 375pp. $39.95 paper. ISBN: 9780415951500.The History of Sexuality: An Introduction (Volume I), by FoucaultMichel. New York, NY: Vintage Books, 1978. $14.00 paper. ISBN: 0394417755.Erotic Journeys: Mexican Immigrants and their Sex Lives, by González-LópezGloria. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2005. 320pp. $26.95 paper. ISBN: 0520231392.Dude, You're a Fag: Masculinity and Sexuality in High School, by PascoeC.J.Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2007. 227pp. $22.95 paper. ISBN: 9780520252301.Queer Theory/Sociology, edited by SeidmanSteven. Cambridge, MA.: Blackwell, 1996. 450pp. $54.95 paper. ISBN: 9781557867407.Political Institutions and Lesbian and Gay Rights in the United States and Canada, by SmithMiriam. New York, NY: Routledge, 2008. 230pp. $45.95 paper. ISBN: 9780415988711.The Longest War: Sex Differences in Perspective, by TavrisCarolWadeCarole. San Diego, CA: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1984. 416pp. O.P. paper. ISBN: 0155511866.Imagining Transgender: An Ethnography of a Category, by ValentineDavid. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2007. 302pp. $24.95 paper. ISBN: 9780822338697.. Contemporary Sociology: A Journal of Reviews, Vol. 42, Issue. 1, p. 22.  Thompson, Kirrilly 2010. Because looks can be deceiving: media alarm and the sexualisation of childhood – do we know what we mean?. Journal of Gender Studies, Vol. 19, Issue. 4, p. 395.  Blackwood, Evelyn 1998. Tombois in West Sumatra: Constructing Masculinity and Erotic Desire. Cultural Anthropology, Vol. 13, Issue. 4, p. 491.  Almeida, Miguel Vale de 1995. Senhores de Si. p. 251.  Parker, Richard G. 1989. Bodies and Pleasures: On the Construction of Erotic Meanings in Contemporary Brazil. Anthropology <html_ent glyph="@amp;" ascii="@amp;"/> Humanism Quarterly, Vol. 14, Issue. 2, p. 58.  Parker, Richard G. 1989. Bodies and Pleasures: On the Construction of Erotic Meanings in Contemporary Brazil. Anthropology and Humanism Quarterly, Vol. 14, Issue. 2, p. 58.  Lewis, Lisa A. 1987. Female Address in Music Video. Journal of Communication Inquiry, Vol. 11, Issue. 1, p. 73.  Pollis, Carol A. 1987. The apparatus of sexuality: Reflections on Foucault's contributions to the study of sex in history. Journal of Sex Research, Vol. 23, Issue. 3, p. 401.  Kuznesof, Elizabeth and Oppenheimer, Robert 1985. The Family and Society in Nineteenth-Century Latin America: an Historiographical Introduction. Journal of Family History, Vol. 10, Issue. 3, p. 215.  Dwyer Amussen, Susan 1985. Féminin/masculin: le genre dans l'Angleterre de l'époque moderne. Annales
The team of Bulgarian archaeologist Elena Bozhinova has discovered a stone cast for the casting of metal spear tips from the Antiquity period during rescue excavations in the Old Town of the southern city of Plovdiv.  Archaeologist Elena Bozhinova and her team from the Plovdiv Museum of Archaeology are wrapping up the rescue excavations of a plot formerly occupied by a home on the Saborna Str. in the famous Old Town Architectural and Historical Preserve.  The 100-year-old house occupying the property was torn down several months ago by the local authorities because it was decided that it posed a public safety hazard, reports local news site Pod Tepeto.  The rescue excavations of the plot, however, are now yielding interesting archaeological discoveries such as the partially preserved stone cast designed for casting bronze spear tips. This is the first discovery of spear tip casting instrument in Southern Bulgaria.  Archaeologist Elena Bozhinova has explained that the stone cast for the production of spear tips originally consisted of two parts which fit perfectly after they were tied together with a rope.  Once they were tied together, melted bronze was poured into the opening of the cast in order to produce a spear tip.  Other Antiquity finds discovered by Bozhinova's team include a wide range of ceramic vessels and several fragments from inscriptions as well as well preserved bone needles similar to modern-day hairpins, which were used by the ancient women as accessories and decorations. The Plovdiv archaeologists have also found rammers from the 4th century AD.  Unfortunately, the site's archaeological layers from the Antiquity have been found to be rather damaged because the plot was inhabited during the period of the Ottoman Empire.  Background Infonotes:  The history of today's Bulgarian city of Plovdiv began on the ancient hill of Nebet Tepe ("tepe" is the Turkish word for "hill"), one of the seven historic hills where it was founded and developed in prehistoric and ancient times. The hills, or "tepeta", are still known today by their Turkish names from the Ottoman period. Out of all of them, Nebet Tepe has the earliest traces of civilized life dating back to the 6th millennium BC, which makes Plovdiv 8,000 years old, and allegedly the oldest city in Europe. Around 1200 BC, the prehistoric settlement on Nebet Tepe was transformed into the Ancient Thracian city of Eumolpia, also known as Pulpudeva, inhabited by the powerful Ancient Thracian tribe Bessi. During the Early Antiquity period Eumolpia / Pulpudeva grew to encompass the two nearby hills (Dzhambaz Tepe and Taxim Tepe known together with Nebet Tepe as "The Three Hills") as well, with the oldest settlement on Nebet Tepe becoming the citadel of the city acropolis.  In 342 BC, the Thracian city of Eumolpia / Pulpudeva was conquered by King Philip II of Macedon renaming the city to Philippopolis. Philippopolis developed further as a major urban center during the Hellenistic period after the collapse of Alexander the Great's Empire. In the 1st century AD, more precisely in 46 AD, Ancient Thrace was annexed by the Roman Empire making Philippopolis the major city in the Ancient Roman province of Thrace. This is the period when the city expanded further into the plain around The Three Hills. Because of the large scale public construction works during the period of Ancient Rome's Flavian Dynasty (69-96 AD, including Emperor Vespasian (r. 69-79 AD), Emperor Titus (r. 79-81 AD), Emperor Domitian (r. 81-96 AD)), Plovdiv was also known as Flavia Philippopolis. Later emerging as a major Early Byzantine city, Plovdiv was conquered for the First Bulgarian Empire (632/680 – 1018 AD) by Khan (or Kanas) Krum (r. 803-814 AD) in 812 AD but was permanently incorporated into Bulgaria under Khan (or Kanas) Malamir (r. 831-836 AD) in 834 AD. In Old Bulgarian (also known today as Church Slavonic), the city's name was recorded as Papaldin, Paldin, and Pladin, and later Plavdiv from which today's name Plovdiv originated. The Nebet Tepe fortress continued to be an important part of the city's fortifications until the 14th century when the Second Bulgarian Empire (1185-1396 AD) was conquered by the Ottoman Turks. During the period the Ottoman yoke (1396-1878/1912) when Bulgaria was part of the Ottoman Empire, Plovdiv was called Filibe in Turkish.  Today the prehistoric, ancient, and medieval settlement on Nebet Tepe has been recognized as
Watch Live TV on Your Computer or Roku Free for 45 Days!  Another great way to watch NFL football games on Roku is to visit the NFL Game Rewind website and subscribe to one of their streaming HD NFL game packages. Then use the Plex trick we show you below to watch full NFL games on your Roku. NFL Game Rewind Packages Pricing: $59.99 Season Plus $29.99 Season  $24.99 Follow Your Team $9.99 Watch for Seven Days Visit NFL Game Rewind to learn more and Subscribe. Use MyPlex to Watch Internet Videos and NFL on Roku On your computer once the game is playing , use the Plex-It button by dragging it to the page which contains the streaming video. This will add the NFL game to your Plex Queue and you can then open the Plex channel on your Roku and watch the NFL game on your large screen television. If you have Plex Media Server installed on a computer you can watch NFL Rewind on your Roku through the NFL Network Channel that is available on Plex. Chromecast can also cast the NFL Rewind game to your TV from your PC, notebook or handheld device. Here are step by step instructions how to install and setup "MyPlex" Currently one of the easiest and best ways we found to watch NFL Games on your Roku. Click Here for our HUGE list of Roku Sports Channels! If you have SiriusXM All Access you can listen to every MLB, NFL, NBA, NHL and PGA game on your Roku, Computer, Smart Phone or Tablet. Add the Sirius XM Roku Channel Where to Stream NFL Games - has some more great NFL resources for cord cutters. Roku Channels • Index • Contact • Disclosure • Privacy © 2018 mkvXstream.com Use of third-party trademarks on this site is not intended to imply endorsement nor affiliation with respective trademark owners
Unexpected Error An unexpected error occurred. If you continue to receive this error please contact your Tableau Server Administrator.  {"facebookAppID":"242391562456920","allow_select":true,"allow_filter":true,"allow_sheetlink":true,"allow_highlight":true,"allow_tooltip":true,"allow_view_underlying":true,"allow_summary":true,"allow_commenting":false,"allow_commenting_mentions":true,"allow_add_comment":true,"allow_view_comments":true,"allow_custom_views":false,"allow_custom_view_default":false,"allow_custom_view_share":false,"allow_custom_view_save":false,"allow_authoring":false,"allow_data_alert":false,"allow_save":false,"allow_save_as":false,"allow_save_data_source":false,"allow_subscriptions":false,"workbook_allow_subscriptions":false,"allow_subscribe_others":false,"allow_add_new_datasource":false,"workbook_owner_friendly_name":"Robert Rouse","is_guest":true,"is_revision_history_preview":false,"current_user_email":null,"current_user_id":2,"current_user_friendly_name":"Guest","current_user_domain_name":"local","current_user_name":"guest","current_user_image_url":null,"current_custom_view_id":null,"vizql_root":"/vizql/w/USvsTHEM/v/USvs_THEM","site_root":"","site_url_name":"","site_name":"Default","composite_sizes":"{\"tablet\":{\"maxHeight\":855,\"maxWidth\":1100,\"minHeight\":855,\"minWidth\":1100},\"desktop\":{\"maxHeight\":855,\"maxWidth\":1100,\"minHeight\":855,\"minWidth\":1100},\"phone\":{\"maxHeight\":855,\"maxWidth\":1100,\"minHeight\":855,\"minWidth\":1100}}","dsd_phone_max_size":500,"dsd_tablet_max_size":800,"visible_sheets":["US vs. THEM"],"is_mobile":false,"is_mobile_device":false,"is_mobile_app":false,"is_authoring":false,"is_metrics_view":false,"is_metrics_enabled":false,"repository_urls":["USvsTHEM/USvs_THEM"],"origin_repository_url":"USvsTHEM/USvs_THEM","workbook_repo_url":"USvsTHEM","tabs_allowed":false,"showTabsWorkbook":false,"current_project_id":5216,"current_sheet_name":"","current_workbook_id":3028634,"current_view_id":"12422453","sheetId":"US%20vs.%20THEM","showParams":"{\"checkpoint\":false,\"refresh\":false,\"refreshUnmodified\":false}","stickySessionKey":"{\"featureFlags\":\"{}\",\"isAuthoring\":false,\"isOfflineMode\":false,\"lastUpdatedAt\":1505420092204,\"viewId\":12422453,\"workbookId\":3028634}","filterTileSize":200,"locale":"en_US","userTimeZoneId":"UTC","userTimeZoneDisplayName":"(UTC+00:00) UTC","workbookLocale":null,"browser_rendering_threshold":100,"language":"en","version":"public-release","externalVersion":"0.0.0","is_saas":false,"contact_support_uri":"","clear_session_on_unload":true,"lyteboxedVizWidth":1100,"facebookRedirectURI":"https://facebook.com","facebookDescription":"Follow the link to view the data","is_browser_rendering_requested":true,"bootstrapOnMouseover":false,"bootstrapWhenNotified":false,"show_byline":true,"forceToolbarTop":false,"sessionid":"D9F77EBB1D2F41D0BFB97CAE9F559452-0:0","sessionIdHash":"rL9FQNj3E8tvzGXXYpG9jfT8PGfEbxUHNRQRBdq/NgQ=","layoutid":"","toolbarContainerVis":true,"toolbarvis":true,"toolbarvisDefault":true,"linktarget":null,"watermarklink":"https://www.table
Wrong. In 2004, two economists looked into whether more sexual variety led to greater well-being. They looked at data from about 16,000 adult Americans who were asked confidentially how many sex partners they had had in the preceding year, and about their happiness. Across men and women alike, the data show that the optimal number of partners is one.  This might seem totally counterintuitive. After all, we are unambiguously driven to accumulate material goods, to seek fame, to look for pleasure. How can it be that these very things can give us unhappiness instead of happiness? There are two explanations, one biological and the other philosophical.  From an evolutionary perspective, it makes sense that we are wired to seek fame, wealth and sexual variety. These things make us more likely to pass on our DNA. Had your cave-man ancestors not acquired some version of these things (a fine reputation for being a great rock sharpener; multiple animal skins), they might not have found enough mating partners to create your lineage.  But here's where the evolutionary cables have crossed: We assume that things we are attracted to will relieve our suffering and raise our happiness. My brain says, "Get famous." It also says, "Unhappiness is lousy." I conflate the two, getting, "Get famous and you'll be less unhappy."  But that is Mother Nature's cruel hoax. She doesn't really care either way whether you are unhappy — she just wants you to want to pass on your genetic material. If you conflate intergenerational survival with well-being, that's your problem, not nature's. And matters are hardly helped by nature's useful idiots in society, who propagate a popular piece of life-ruining advice: "If it feels good, do it." Unless you share the same existential goals as protozoa, this is often flat-out wrong.  More philosophically, the problem stems from dissatisfaction — the sense that nothing has full flavor, and we want more. We can't quite pin down what it is that we seek. Without a great deal of reflection and spiritual hard work, the likely candidates seem to be material things, physical pleasures or favor among friends and strangers.  We look for these things to fill an inner emptiness. They may bring a brief satisfaction, but it never lasts, and it is never enough. And so we crave more. This paradox has a word in Sanskrit: upadana, which refers to the cycle of craving and grasping. As the Dhammapada (the Buddha's path of wisdom) puts it: "The craving of one given to heedless living grows like a creeper. Like the monkey seeking fruits in the forest, he leaps from life to life... Whoever is overcome by this wretched and sticky craving, his sorrows grow like grass after the rains."
This quick draw knife sheath is 100% hand crafted from the finest top grain leather. It is hand stitched for quality and strength. All of the edges are fully beveled and burnished. This item is designed to be worn on the left hip with the snap facing outward for a left hand back draw or on the right hip for a left hand cross draw. See other listings for right side snap orientation.   This sheath is designed for the Buck 110 shown but not included, and has a belt loop snap to keep it secure while drawing.   Other colors and designs are available. Please inquire   Check this video for specifications and usage.  https://youtu.be/uQ-vCHKtgao
Touchscreen publishing company Onswipe has good news for Samsung. As Onswipe's Chief Marketing Officer Jason Baptiste put it in an email, "Samsung clearly won Christmas when it comes to tablets."  Specifically, the company looked at visitors to Onswipe-optimized sites for the period of Dec. 26-29 in comparison to Dec. 19-22, as a way to measure the growth that different tablet platforms saw over Christmas. The results? Samsung's Galaxy tablets grew 50.4 percent, Nexus 7 tablets grew 33.8 percent, iPads grew 20.4 percent, and Kindle Fires grew 19.5 percent.  Now, the fact that Onswipe focused on percentage growth is an important caveat here. After all, Samsung was presumably starting from (much) less, so it didn't need to sell as many tablets to see significant growth.  It's also interesting to see the line about Samsung's victory coming from Baptiste, who recently wrote a blog post telling people to "stop believing the fairy tales about the iPad's demise." I asked him if the data made him reconsider the post, and he said no: "Though they enjoyed more growth post holidays, Samsung is still very tiny compared to the iPad and the same goes for the rest of Android. What will be interesting is seeing whether people still use Android tablets 90 days out from now."  Baptiste also provided some numbers about usage. He said the average session time from Samsung users was three minutes and nine seconds after Christmas, down from 3:32 before. On iPad, the average session was 4:03, compared to 4:12 before. And the Kindle Fire had the longest session time on average, 4:51.  As for how many people this data represents, Baptiste said Onswipe (which recently upgraded its platform) reaches 31 million unique visitors each month on the mobile web.
Save their lives, or build a border wall?  Donald Trump would like for the United States to spend $1.1 billion less on HIV-treatment programs in sub-Saharan Africa, and $524 million less on contraception for the global poor.  On the plus side, these cuts will make it easier to finance the president's border wall, which he hopes to spend $1.6 billion on in 2018.  On the downside:  At least one million people will die in sub-Saharan Africa and elsewhere, researchers and advocates said on Tuesday, if funding cuts proposed by the Trump administration to global public health programs are enacted.   … With a huge share of Africa's population reaching sexual maturity in the next four years, the virus could again imperil much of the continent if fewer people are treated, said Brian Honermann, deputy director at amfAR, a foundation that invests in AIDS research.   AIDS treatment not only keeps people alive but prevents them from spreading the virus to others, Mr. Honermann noted. "If you cut the funding by this much, I think there's a real risk we will backslide, and a whole lot more people will become infected," he said.  These cuts almost certainly won't happen. The President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (Pepfar) — America's primary program for funding HIV treatment — is one of George W. Bush's (only) signature achievements, and enjoys strong, bipartisan support.  So, it's tempting to dismiss these eye-popping death-toll estimates as irrelevant — ultimately, the Trump budget is just Mick Mulvaney's (sloppily executed) math homework, not an actual governing document.  But such nonchalance is wrongheaded. And not only because Trump's budget functions as an expression of his (monstrous) values.  The president may be unlikely to cut $1 billion from AIDS treatment, but his budget makes it clear that he will not be adding any more money to such programs. And that latter fact is about as morally objectionable as the first.  The Global Fund estimates that every $100 million invested in HIV treatment saves about 133,000 lives. Currently, the United States — the wealthiest country in human history — spends $6 billion annually on AIDS programs. The Pentagon recently spent $125 billion on (what its own internal study deemed) "administrative waste."  Our nation could easily afford to save hundreds of thousands more people from preventable deaths. When we choose instead to cut taxes for the rich — and/or spend $1 trillion on the F-35 — we are choosing to let them die.
Philadelphia police have identified the suspect wanted in the assault of a 33-year-old blind man in Germantown.  Mustafa Guyton, 29, lives near the crime scene, which was in the area of Seymour Street and Wayne Avenue.  This comes after police released more video in this case, hoping it will led to an arrest.  The assault happened shortly after 12:00 p.m. on Wednesday, October 2nd.  In a news release issued Tuesday, police said the blind man is a 33-year-old who was walking on Seymour Street toward Wayne Avenue.  The suspect, identified by police as Guyton, is seen standing on the corner and, on the video, he appears to look down the street as the victim approaches.  The suspect knocks the victim to the ground then kicks and stomps him, injuring his face and head.  As the camera continues to roll, the suspect is seen slowly walking away, putting a backpack over his shoulder as he leaves.  Police did not indicate any possible motive for the attack.  On the video, several people are seen walking by but no one stops to help.  Police say Guyton was wearing a tan baseball cap, tan shirt, khaki pants and a dark-colored backpack.  Anyone with information is urged to contact Philadelphia Police at 215-686-TIPS (8477), text a tip to PPD TIP (773847) or through PhillyPolice.com.
Former FBI Director James Comey said the president has the right to end any investigation although there are "important norms" against doing so.  During his testimony Thursday, Comey confirmed comments made by Harvard Law professor Alan Dershowitz Wednesday evening that legally, the president can start or stop any investigation. (VIDEO: Dershowitz — Trump Could Have Shut Down The Flynn Investigation)  "I'm not a legal scholar, so smarter people have answered this better," Comey explained, "but speaking as a legal matter, the president, as the head of the Executive Branch… and we have important norms against this…[can] direct that anybody can be investigated or anybody not be investigated."  Dershowitz claimed Wednesday that this right would clear the president of any obstruction of justice charges.  "I think he has the legal authority because, ultimately, we all report to the Executive Branch up to the president," Comey confirmed.  "If he wanted to issue a direct order, he could do it in any way," he finished.  WATCH:  Follow Amber on Twitter
What is the best rep range to use for muscle building? Well, what I am about to say might surprise you: There is no magical rep range. There are reasonable ranges, but at the end of the day as long as you aren't trying to turn weight training into an aerobic activity, most rep ranges between 5 and 12 (even up to 20) will assist you with muscle building if they are used wisely.  One thing you learn working with top level bodybuilders and powerlifters on a daily basis is the reality that no two athletes train alike. Some train with lower rep schemes, some train with a variety of rep ranges, and a few even train with very high reps. Chet Yorton, who defeated Arnold Schwarzenegger at the 1966 NABBA Mr. Universe, is known for using a system of training that focused on 22 rep sets. On the other hand, Arnold relied heavily on Reg Park style 5x5 workouts as a younger bodybuilder.  So here we have the paradigm that baffles most trainees...Chet Yorton used 22 rep sets, Arnold Schwarzenegger used 5 rep sets, and both were monsters! What gives? Does everything work? Well, sort of. The question is actually more complicated than just sets and reps, and boils down to the concept of training volume.  Training Volume: More Important Than Reps and Sets  What in the world is training volume, and why should you care? Let's take a closer look.  Training Volume (V) = Sets (S) x Reps (R) x Weight (W)  ...or simplified: V = S x R x W  Instead of considering the sets and rep ranges of a workout, you should really be focusing on daily training volume. Training volume is a better tool when trying to gage the demands of an individual training approach or workout. Obviously, volume can't measure the impact of training techniques such as training to failure, but it still provides an amazing insight into just how hard you are working out.  Let's compare a couple of popular training approaches:  3 sets x 8-10 reps.  5 sets x 5 reps.  Do a Google search and you will find many arguments as to which of these training protocols is superior. Those who support the 3 x 8-10 approach will claim that the 5 x 5 is inferior because "low reps don't build muscle", or because 5 reps sets don't have enough "time under tension" (or the amount of time spent under the bar for any given set). On the other hand, 5 x 5 advocates might claim that the first few reps of an 8-10 rep set are "fluff", and do very little to stimulate growth because they feel relatively light.  So which camp is right? Neither. Both approaches are valid, and virtually equal when one looks at the overall training volume used during both workouts. Let me explain.  Most individuals will be able to use 90% of the weight they can move on 5 reps sets for their 8 rep sets. This is a generalization, of course, but a solid one for the sake of comparison. So for the above 2 approaches, we arrive at the following training volumes:  3 sets x 8-10 reps x 200 pounds (rounded down a hair for practical reasons, and using a 9 rep average). This yields a total workout volume of 5,400 pounds .  (rounded down a hair for practical reasons, and using a 9 rep average). This yields a total workout volume of . 5 sets x 5 reps x 225 pounds. This yields a total workout volume of 5,625 pounds .  Now obviously this is a dumbed down version of this comparison. There are other possible variables that could change these scenarios. But with that said, if you look at overall training volumes for these approaches you notice that the weight moved (volume) is almost identical.  In addition, if you were to perform 2 sets x 20 reps with 135 pounds, which seems like a reasonable amount of weight given the above numbers, your training volume would be 5,400 total pounds . One could argue that a 20 rep set is not very taxing during the first few reps, but anyone that has ever performed a 20 rep set of squats knows just how impossibly tough the last few reps are. Obviously 20 rep sets are not recommended for most sets, but they can be effective tool.  Starting to see a bigger picture here? Regardless of the rep ranges used, the body is being taxed with virtually the same "time under tension" and load. While this is not a perfect system for analyzing workouts, it is far more advanced than simply focusing on sets and reps.  Structuring A Workout Based On Training Volume  In my article on training splits I outlined a reasonable amount of sets to perform on a weekly basis per bodypart. Here is a recap:  9 to 15 weekly sets - Large Muscle Groups . These groups include chest, back, shoulders
Follow Jeff Add to circle   Turbo lag is a defining characteristic of older forced-induction cars. These large turbochargers were used to feed high-performance engines and generate significant power. The problem would come when you called upon that power. Your right foot mashes the gas—then nothing. A shock of power would eventually make its way to the drive wheels, sometimes mid-corner. Turbo lag is notoriously finicky (and in the case of old race cars, a killer) and automakers have been working on ways to reduce or eliminate it. Volvo has its own solution and it involves a bit of engineering that we need explained.  The system is called Power Pulse, and it works with the help of an air compressor and an electric motor. The motor waits for the driver to ask for more power, and it keeps the air compressor tank ready to go with clean air pulled in from the intake. When the throttle is pressed, the air tank can then force compressed air into the exhaust manifold and send it along with the exhaust gases to spool up the turbo.  This is almost similar to what the Fast and Furious crew would be doing when they hit their "nitrous" button. They want to force more air into the engine, and here Volvo is forcing more air into the exhaust manifold to get the turbo up to speed more quickly. There's no need for bottles of NOS though, as the air compressor seems suited to handle the task.  Once the turbo has spooled up, the air compressor's job is done. Now the electric motor refills the tank so the Power Pulse system is ready to help out the next time it's needed.  _______________________________________  Follow Motor Authority on Facebook, Twitter and YouTube.
A few weeks ago we launched our new webmail service for all users at FastMail. Once being used by a wider audience, we of course received reports of a few edge cases our testing hadn't managed to uncover. One of the more interesting issues we discovered came from this use case: our user liked to scroll down his inbox, opening each email he wanted to read in a new tab in the background. Then he would go through the tabs, closing each one as he was done with it. So far, so good. Except, in Chrome, his browser of choice, as soon as about 5 tabs were open, the rest failed to load, and the earlier ones then started having communication errors as well.  A quick bit of research and testing yielded the problem: Chrome limits itself to a maximum of 6 concurrent connections to a single origin across the whole browser. Each tab was loading a full instance of the mail application, which meant it was creating an EventSource object and connection to our push server, to be notified of new deliveries (see this previous post for how that works). Since these connections are permanent (that's the whole idea!), opening lots of tabs quickly used up all the available connections, with none left to fetch any actual data. To the user, this appeared as "Could not connect to server" error messages.  The solution to this problem was not immediately obvious. Ideally, we would like to maintain a single push connection and share it between the tabs, but there's no API for getting a reference to other tabs or windows in the browser, even if they're pointed to the same domain. Then I remembered that setting a property on local storage triggers a "storage" event on the window object of every open tab with the same origin. This, I realised, could be used to synchronise behaviour across tabs.  The concept is fairly simple. Only one tab keeps a push connection; we call this the master tab. When it receives a push event, it broadcasts it by setting the event as a property on local storage called "broadcast". When a tab receives the storage event for this key, it reads the JSON-encoded event object from local storage and processes it as though it had been received via an EventSource object.  The tricky part comes in coordinating between the tabs who should be master. The master tab also sets a value called "ping" on local storage roughly every 30 seconds to the current time stamp. When a tab first loads it checks for this value; if it is greater than 45 seconds ago it presumes there is no current master, so it becomes master. Otherwise, it becomes a slave. However, whilst it is a slave, it continuously monitors for storage events with a key of "ping", and if it hasn't heard a ping within a 45 second period, it takes over as master. This switches control to another tab when the master tab closes. On browsers supporting the "unload" event we can make the changeover happen pretty much instantly, by setting the "ping" value to 0 in local storage when the tab is closed.  This all works very well, but there's one problem remaining: race conditions. There is no API for taking out an explicit lock on local storage, so the spec advocates the use of a per-origin mutex which would be acquired by scripts once they try to access the storage, and then released when the script finishes. Not all browsers have adopted this. The Chrome developers, for example, have decided the performance penalty is too great. Therefore, in some browsers, it is possible for scripts in different tabs to interleave such that, for example, each tries to take master at the same time, then each notices another has taken it so none end up as master! The solution we have adopted is to add a random component to the delay between pings and waiting for pings. This makes it unlikely that two tabs will both attempt to take master at the same time. Of course this can still happen, but should it do so, the random variation in each new master sending out a ping should ensure that one is quickly turned back to a slave. It will be eventually consistent, which is good enough for our purposes.  In case this is of use to anyone else, here's the code we use (rewritten slightly to use pure JS rather than be based on our library code). It's also available as a gist on github. You can try it out on this test page; just open the page in several windows or tabs, then close the master and see the control pass to another. You can also broadcast a message from any tab to the other tabs.
Wacom Wireless Accessory Kit for Bamboo and Intuos Tablets (ack40401)  Korean White Transparent Keyboard Sticker Printed in Korea Best Quality  Russian White Transparent Sticker for Mac/apple or Windows Centered Keyboard  Current slide {CURRENT_SLIDE} of {TOTAL_SLIDES}- Best Selling in Other Keyboards & Mice  English US LARGE LETTER KEYBOARD STICKERS for Computer or Laptop, YELLOW  OEM Logitech Unifying Receiver Dongle for Keyboard and Mouse M325 M315 M515 M510  Current slide {CURRENT_SLIDE} of {TOTAL_SLIDES}- Save on Other Keyboards & Mice  Trending price is based on prices over last 90 days.  Current slide {CURRENT_SLIDE} of {TOTAL_SLIDES}- You may also like  You may also like  This item doesn't belong on this page.
David North addresses London meeting on the 15th anniversary of the WSWS  By our reporters  8 May 2013  The London WSWS 15th anniversary meeting  David North, chairman of the World Socialist Web Site 's international editorial board and national chairman of the Socialist Equality Party in the United States, addressed a May 5 meeting on 15th anniversary of the WSWS in London. The meeting was well attended, with 135 present, including workers and young people from South Africa, Greece, Italy, France, Ireland, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Pakistan, Libya and Bangladesh. North's presentation had a powerful impact, with dozens seeking continued contact with the Socialist Equality Party in Britain and a number applying to join.  The audience listened attentively to North's extensive lecture. It began with an outline of the theoretical and philosophical foundations of the WSWS—rooted in the historical materialist tradition established by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels.  North gave an explanation of the present political situation, which centred on a comparison between the 15 years of the WSWS, 1998-2013, with the the equivalent period 100 years ago, 1898-1913. The earlier period led to the outbreak of World War I in 1914 and the subsequent revolutionary overthrow of Tsarism in Russia in 1917, in which the world's first workers' state was established by Lenin, Trotsky and the Bolsheviks.  The historic parallels drawn included a survey of the depth of the present economic crisis, the return to colonial-style wars, led by the United States, and the growing danger of war against Iran in the Middle East and against China.  North noted the sharp ideological separation of the classical Marxist tradition represented by the International Committee of the Fourth International and the WSWS from the various petty bourgeois tendencies that now stood openly as pro-capitalist and pro-war.  The report was followed by wide-ranging questions from the audience. Among many questions asked, Neil, a philosophy student, noted how the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender (LGBT) movement had adopted right-wing, pro-war positions. He asked North, "How do we within these various identities move our fellows into a different position, a Marxist position?"  North said that Marxism could not be utilised to render more correct an orientation based upon identity politics. He explained that identity politics is deeply rooted in postmodernism's repudiation of both the Enlightenment conception of a unified humanity and of Marxism, which is based upon class politics.  All discrimination based on a person's sexual orientation must be opposed, North said. "This shouldn't be an issue with thoughtful people who are concerned with democratic rights." But a political perspective that declares sexual identity and race to be the primary social categories is invariably an attack on class-based politics and a striving instead for "the allocation of privileges amongst various select identities."  Amjad from Glasgow spoke about the "incompetence" of the trade unions and their inability to "build a meaningful resistance to austerity." He asked, "Do we need to build new trade unions? How do we organise the working class?"  Amjad referred to what he called "the Venezuela experiment," asking how the SEP saw the future of Venezuela after the death of President Hugo Chavez.  North explained that underlying the breakdown of the trade unions internationally "is the globalisation of capitalist production and the international mobility of capital."  The national programmes of the trade unions were "blown apart by globalisation… There is an objective basis for the crisis of trade unionism, and the rottenness of the bureaucracies is only a subjective expression of that deeper objective problem."  In a broader historical perspective, he added, "trade unions at best can only be defensive organisations of the working class, and the problem of social revolution cannot be resolved by organisations whose aim is to fix the best possible conditions for the sale of labour power."  The existing trade unions have long ago given up even that function. However, "The task before us is not the formation of new trade unions, but the creation of insurgent organisations of the working class, of a democratic character, revolutionary in their orientation, such as factory councils, rank and file committees. Such a struggle can only bear fruit by building a revolutionary movement in the working class.  "What separates the International Committee from other groups is that we do not conceive of the workers' movement in a trade union form. The central problem of the working class is politics, the struggle for power, the reorganisation of the productive forces of mankind. That is the central question."  Turning to Venezuela, North asked, "How long do we have to go on debating this? Looking for another leader, whether his name is Castro or Chavez or, at one time, Nasser in Egypt, Ben Bella in Algeria? Looking for one or another hero based on a largely bourgeois movement that shall grant reforms we can call socialism?"  "The question again is the independent organisation of the
The reputation of Britons abroad suffered yet another setback this week, when 19-year-old Thomas Strong was expelled from Turkey for exposing himself and shouting obscenities at a statue of the nation's founder.  The Cumbrian teenager was unable to explain his behaviour when he appeared before a Turkish court in the holiday resort of Marmaris, telling the judge: "I don't know why I did it."  He was summarily deported and banned from re-entering the country for five years, but locals who do not feel honour has yet been satisfied have set up a Facebook group titled "String Up Strong" and are calling for him to be hanged.  Ayhan Hatay watched in horror on Sunday as Strong pulled down his shorts and began swearing at the statue of Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, who led the Turkish national movement and established the Republic in 1923.  "To be honest, he's lucky it was the police that took him – Ataturk is the father of the Turkish Republic and a national hero – the local boys wanted to kill him for being so insulting," he said.  Last month, the Foreign Office said 237 Britons were arrested or detained in Greece and 434 required hospitalisation between April 2008 and March 2009.  The problem is not confined to the Greek beach resorts popular with young British binge-drinkers: a total of 4,603 Britons were arrested in other countries around the world between 2007 and 2007, according to the most recent British Behaviour Abroad report.  The shenanigans of this raucous minority do not go unnoticed, and British tourists were recently named the worst behaved in Europe in a survey by Expedia, the holiday bookings company, of more than 4,500 hoteliers.  But Dr Arthur Cassidy, a social psychologist at the Belfast Institute, believes the stereotype of badly behaved Britons abroad has become a self-fulfilling prophesy, with tourists conforming to the perceived norm of drunken, loutish behaviour as a way of coping with a foreign environment.  "When we find ourselves in an alien environment in which we aren't sure how we should behave, we begin to conform to group expectations," he said.  "We know, as British tourists, that we are expected to binge drink and behave badly, and there is a strong element of peer pressure in groups of young people who travel abroad together, so they find themselves conforming to the cultural expectations of their own country, rather than the country they are holidaying in.  "For young people, often, the psychological cost of failing to conform to group pressure – the fear of exclusion and loneliness – seems far greater that the cost of engaging in dangerous behaviour."  Dr Cassidy also said binge drinking habits have eroded the social skills of many British tourists, so they overcompensate by engaging in risky sexual and physical activities.  "Drinking to excess to the extent that your life is at risk has become a central part of British culture, even though it is not enjoyable," he said.  "While in other cultures in Europe people drink as part of a varied social life, here it is the focus. This kind of excessive drinking has led to a sort of verbal amnesia deficit – we have forgotten how to communicate with each other, and we compensate for our verbal incompetence with physical and sexual display which can be offensive in other cultures."  The psychologist also suggested that a lack of inhibitions when away from home and the higher temperatures of many European countries made people more prone to violent and sexually risky behaviour.  Higher levels of disposable income among young people in Britain than in the rest of Europe also made it easier for them to spend large amounts of money on alcohol, he said.  Excessive drinking and poor-quality, strong alcohol frequently contribute to arrests and hospitalisations abroad, according to the Foreign Office.  This is particularly true in the European tourist destinations made accessible by cheap airlines.  The mayor of the Latvian capital of Riga said earlier this month that British stag parties would no longer be welcomed to the city, telling a local magazine he had lost patience with the unruly groups urinating and climbing naked on Riga's revered Freedom Monument.  "Let's not be politically correct – unfortunately, this is their speciality," said Nils Usakovs.  Last month, a young British plumber, Stuart Feltham, became a target for national outrage in Greece when a local woman allegedly threw her drink over him and set him on fire because she claimed he exposed himself and tried to grope her in a nightclub.  But while the Expedia survey showed Britons were voted the worst behaved visitors by hoteliers in European countries, they were ranked the second best tourists overall by hotel staff around the rest of the world.  Stephen Davis, head of research at Expedia, said the speed and ease of cheap flights to other European cities mean Britons are more likely to misbehave closer to
Rep. Judy Chu (D-CA) was among those arrested Wednesday during a rally in Washington D.C. to urge Congress to vote on legislation that would protect the ability of young immigrants to work and study in the U.S. without fear of deportation.  Chu's office confirmed the congresswoman's arrest to NBC News late Wednesday afternoon, saying it happened at 2:30 p.m. ET. Chu was released an hour later, her office said.  A Capitol Police spokesperson, reached by phone, could not immediately confirm Chu's arrest. She said they were in the middle of processing a total of 182 arrests.  A statement from Chu's office said she was charged with "crowding, obstructing, or incommoding." Her office also told NBC News she was given a fine to pay.  Chu had tweeted Wednesday morning she was prepared to be arrested.  The event began around 1:45 p.m. ET, according to Chu's office, and was attended by 2,000 young immigrants and their supporters.  It comes as President Donald Trump announced the end of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program in September, created under President Barack Obama. DACA temporarily removed the threat of deportation for undocumented immigrant children and also granted them authorization to work.  As part of a National Day of Action, immigrant and civil rights groups joined business and religious leaders and urged legislators to pass "clean" Dream Act legislation — not tied to any other bill — that would give young teens and adults who have basically grown up in the U.S. the means to remain in the U.S. without fear of removal.  On Wednesday, more than two hundred demonstrators, including immigration community leaders and several members of Congress, staged a sit-in on the U.S. Capitol steps. Rep. Luis Gutierrez (D-Ill) and Chu were among them. In a an act of civil disobedience, they were arrested for refusing to move.  "Our ask is simple: let us vote on the DREAM Act so we can do the right thing for our families, our communities, and our economy," Chu said in a statement Wednesday night.  Capitol Police told participants who did not want to be arrested to step over to the sidewalk, Chu's office said. Those taken into custody, who were given multiple warnings about being arrested, were organized into groups of 15 and brought over to a holding pen area, according to Chu's office.  They were given wristbands instead of being placed in handcuffs, her office said. They were also charged, processed, and handed a ticket for a fine to pay. The dollar amount was not immediately known.  Follow NBC Asian America on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and Tumblr.
About: Made in Canada, I grew up crafting, making, and baking. Out of this love for designing and creating, I pursued a BFA in product design from Parsons School of Design in NYC. Since then I've done work for Mart...  This is the MOST EXPENSIVE CAKE IN THE WORLD! Well ok, not really, but my 24 Carrot Cake is definitely the most expensive LOOKING cake and it tastes like a million bucks, so I count that as close. (A food friend for the new gold MacBook Pro...)  FUN FACT: There are actually 24 baby carrots used in the cake recipe, so the title is completely legit.  Ok, let's get fancy everyone!  ----------------------------------------------------  Check out some of my other fun/cheeky projects:  Beer Koozie Mittens  Paddleball Set  Jackalope Costume  SnickerPoodles  Portable Park
An Australian man has been jailed for six months for posting nude pictures of his former lover on Facebook.  It is the first social networking-related conviction in Australian history and one of just a handful in the world, according to the Fairfax media.  Court documents revealed Ravshan ''Ronnie'' Usmanov, 20, of Sydney, posted six nude photos of his ex-girlfriend on Facebook shortly after they broke up. The photos showed his ex-girlfriend "nude in certain positions and clearly showing her breasts and genitalia."  Usmanov, a credit controller for a shipping company, reportedly told police:  "I put the photos up because she hurt me and it was the only thing [I had] to hurt her."  The Sydney Morning Herald reported that Usmanov emailed his girlfriend after he posted the photos to Facebook, saying: "Some of your photos are now on Facebook." The woman, who was not identified, pleaded with Usmanov to take down the photos. When he refused, she called the police.  Deputy-Chief Magistrate, Jane Mottley, said: "New-age technology through Facebook gives instant access to the world. Facebook as a social networking site has limited boundaries. Incalculable damage can be done to a person's reputation by the irresponsible posting of information through that medium. With its popularity and potential for real harm, there is a genuine need to ensure the use of this medium to commit offenses of this type is deterred."  In 2010, the Dominion Post reported on New Zealand man Joshua Simon Ashby, 20, who was sentenced to four months in jail for posting a naked photo of his ex-girlfriend on Facebook.  His act was described as one of "irresponsible drunken rage" by presiding judge, who also said: "Technology can't be used in this way. You would do incalculable damage to someone's reputation."  Usmanov's ex-girlfriend, who Fairfax chose not to identify, had ended their relationship and moved out of their shared home less than three months before he posted the photos.  Fairfax cited Australian privacy experts as saying the case has exposed the ''tip of the iceberg'' of online offenses that were rarely punished.  More from GlobalPost: Facebook removal of breastfeeding images angers Aussie mums  David Vaile, executive director of the cyberspace law and policy center at the University of New South Wales, said online harassment was not taken as seriously as physical offenses.  ''There are very few convictions under harassment and indecent publication, he told Fairfax. "It's not treated as the same way as, say, breaking into a bank website. There is more police support for criminal damage. In this case, he didn't slash her tires in an act of revenge. He slashed her reputation.''  The legality or otherwise of posting nude photos of others without their permission in the US is unclear, though a Google search reveals several web forums devoted to the topic, including this one.  In sentencing Usmanov, Mottley reportedly said: "New-age technology through Facebook gives instant access to the world. Facebook as a social networking site has limited boundaries. Incalculable damage can be done to a person's reputation by the irresponsible posting of information through that medium. With its popularity and potential for real harm, there is a genuine need to ensure the use of this medium to commit offenses of this type is deterred.  ''The harm to the victim is not difficult to contemplate: embarrassment, humiliation and anxiety at not only the viewing of the images by persons who are known to her but also the prospect of viewing by those who are not. It can only be a matter for speculation as to who else may have seen the images, and whether those images have been stored in such a manner which, at a time the complainant least expects, they will again be available for viewing, circulation or distribution.''  Usmanov's lawyer, Maggie Sten, had argued his was not a ''serious offense,'' to which Mottley fired back: ''What could be more serious than publishing nude photographs of a woman on the internet, what could be more serious?''  She added: ''It's one thing to publish an article in print form with limited circulation. That may affect the objective seriousness of the offense but once it goes on the worldwide web via Facebook it effectively means it's open to anyone who has some link in any way, however remotely.''  More from GlobalPost: Meet the people behind Turkey's 'miracle'
CHICAGO (AP) — The man who got generations of hot dog lovers humming along to the Oscar Mayer Weiner song has died.  An obituary posted online by a northern Illinois funeral home says Richard Trentlage died on Sept. 21 at age 87.  With the words, "Oh, I wish I were an Oscar Mayer wiener," Trentlage helped solidify the company's hot dogs as a piece of Americana.  The jingle he wrote appeared in a 1960s television commercial featuring cartoon children marching along and singing. The tune remained a fixture for the next half a century.  Trentlage was born in Chicago and began penning jingles as a high school student. Later, he transformed his living room into a recording studio, inviting his own children to sing on audition tapes.  (TM and © Copyright 2016 The Associated Press. All Rights Reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.)
Recent studies have found a significant association between PTSD and low heart rate variability (HRV), a biomarker of autonomic dysregulation. Research indicates that respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) biofeedback increases HRV while reducing related pathological symptoms. This controlled pilot study compared RSA biofeedback to progressive muscle relaxation (PMR) as adjunctive interventions for 38 persons with PTSD symptoms in a residential treatment facility for a substance use disorder. Both groups were assessed at pre-intervention and 4-week post-intervention. Group x time interactions revealed significantly greater reductions in depressive symptoms and increases in HRV indices for the RSA group. Both groups significantly reduced PTSD and insomnia symptoms and a statistical trend was observed for reduced substance craving for the RSA group. Increases in HRV were significantly associated with PTSD symptom reduction. Overall, these results provide preliminary support for the efficacy of RSA biofeedback in improving physiological and psychological health for individuals with PTSD.
When we serve them, we are able to feel the love. If we serve other people we can experience that love when we are here on earth. I think that's what He wants.  SALT LAKE CITY — The man looked to be in his 70s, a little worn down, his beard grizzled, attorney Jay L. Kessler noticed as he reached for the documents the man was holding out. The second thing he noticed was his address: 210 S. Rio Grande St., which is The Road Home Community Shelter.  "I got these papers," the man told him. "I don't know what they mean."  What they meant was the man was owed a sizable chunk of money from the years he'd worked in mining in Colorado. He was due a sizable annuity and retirement payments of $600 a month.  "He ended up getting a check for like $15,000. It was a wonderful thing to be able to help him out," Kessler said.  The man was one of thousands of people Kessler has assisted over the past 13 years at the pro bono legal clinic he runs at Catholic Community Services of Utah's St. Vincent de Paul Resource Center. Every Thursday from noon to 3 p.m., Kessler dispenses free legal advice on wide array of civil matters.  "I'm not here to take cases. I'm not here to make money. I'm here to help people," he said.  Kessler volunteered to run the legal clinic, in part, because of the significant number of Utahns who need legal counsel and can't afford it or are unaware of other resources that can help them.  He also knows what it is like to fall on hard times and pick himself up. Kessler's own personal challenges sent him down a path that ultimately resulted in him becoming a lawyer.  Kessler, who is from Philadelphia, used to be a heating and cooling contractor. His business was robust until he contracted Lyme disease and was no longer able to work.  The disease is spread through the bites of infected blacklegged ticks. If untreated, the infection can spread to the joints, the heart and nervous system. Most cases can be treated successfully with long courses of antibiotics.  While Kessler underwent lengthy courses of antibiotics, his wife, Jane, went back to teaching music in schools after staying home to raise the couple's children.  "We as a family were losing everything. We did lose our home. We had to sell everything we had," he said.  For Kessler, it meant starting over professionally.  "I didn't even have an undergraduate degree. I was 35-36 at the time."  He enrolled at Temple University, but he and his wife eventually moved to Utah to be closer to her family. Kessler resumed his college studies at the University of Utah, where he joined a pre-law society and became the chief justice of the student court.  Those experiences stirred his interest in becoming a lawyer. He applied to law school and was admitted to Creighton University in Omaha, Neb.  "I became the first Jewish Mormon to go to the Jesuit law school called Creighton," he said.  Over the three years Kessler was in law school, his family grew fond of the people of Omaha but they were tired of the weather.  Plus Kessler wanted his wife to be able to pursue her lifelong dream of singing in the Mormon Tabernacle Choir, so they moved back to Utah. After passing the Utah Bar exam, Kessler worked for a small law firm. After a few years, he left to form his own practice, which gives him the flexibility to operate the free legal clinic.  Kessler said he is able to volunteer his time because "my wife supports me doing this."  "This is a half-day I don't work. It's a half-day I don't earn money," he said.  But there's clearly a need for his legal advice. People travel from as far away as St. George and Logan to seek his help, he said.  Many people he assists are clients of The Road Home and Catholic Community Services. They come to him with a wide array of legal questions.  At times, the most important service he can offer is to explain the law, including statutes of limitation for taking legal actions. Many people who come to the clinic are unfamiliar with these limited windows of opportunity.  Like the man who asked Kessler's help in filing a lawsuit against a man who had "stabbed" and "sliced" him.  Kessler asked him when and where the stabbing occurred. It was in Chicago in 1968.  After explaining that the deadline to file a lawsuit had long ago expired — more than three decades ago — Kessler offered this advice, "Close that door and move on."  "One of the best things this legal clinic does is diffuse pent-up frustrations and anger in the community," he said
This Sunday, March 13, point your browser to MountainStage.org at 7pm EST to watch a LIVE recording of Mountain Stage with Larry Groce via VuHaus.  Sunday's performance at Charleston's Culture Center Theater marks Mountain Stage's 865th episode and features performances by Brooklyn-based party band Red Baraat, NPR's favorite "Irish Punch Brothers" We Banjo 3, energetic folk-poppers Star & Micey and Minnesota jazz blues bands Davina & the Vagabonds. Our radio listeners will hear this episode on over 150 NPR stations via NPR Music starting April 22.  For those of you watching along online, make sure to share your listening/watching experience with us! Use #MountainStage and #gotowv.  Tag Mountain Stage on Twitter, Instagram, Tumblr and Facebook. Find VuHaus on Twitter, Instagram, Tumblr and Facebook.  Watch more Mountain Stage performances (including our last show featuring Ra Ra Riot, Overcoats, Ona and more) on VuHaus.
After two years of having to use sheep shears and scissors, Norman Wells is going public with their plight in the hope attracting a professional coiffeur  Wanted: one hairdresser. Must be willing to withstand temperatures that can drop as low as -50°C (-58F) and be able to rectify years of DIY trims and amateur styling.  After two years of making do without a hairdresser, the isolated northern Canadian town of Norman Wells in the Northwest Territories – population 800 – is going public with their plight in the hope of attracting a coiffeur.  "It's been a long struggle for us," said Nicky Richards, the economic development officer leading the recruitment effort for this town that sits near the southern edge of the Arctic Circle. "We just don't have anyone. It's something that people down south don't even ever think about because they don't have to worry about it."  Many residents have had to turn to family members to cut their hair or attempt to do it themselves. "We're trying to figure out ways to maintain ourselves," said Richards, who regularly gives the same buzz cut to her husband, a friend and her boss. "I'm not a hairdresser by any set of means, but I do have a set of clippers and that's what I use," she told the Guardian.   When it comes to her own long locks, Richards prefers to hold out, taking advantage of out-of-town trips to schedule hair appointments. It's not the most practical solution, given that the nearest hairdressers are at least a 17-hour drive away, or a four-hour daily flight to Edmonton, in Alberta, costing upwards of C$800 ($577/£400) each way.  Many in town simply let their hair grow, constantly testing the limits of how long they can hold out. "I was in desperate need of a haircut," resident Ryan Spurrell told the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. "So we just did it … in the front yard there, down by the parking lot, with a pair of sheep shears and some scissors."  Over the decades, several hairdressers have come and gone from Norman Wells, leaving behind a workspace in a local inn outfitted with chairs, mirrors and a sink. It's currently available for lease, meaning any entrepreneurial hairstylist need only bring their tools and products. As the town serves as a hub for several surrounding communities, the potential clients number in the few thousand.  The recruitment effort will hopefully get people thinking about the varied business opportunities available in Canada's north, said Susan Colbeck, who works at the local branch of the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, while also solving a longstanding grievance. "We definitely need someone. Anyone who came here would be loved so much."   Since Richards began spreading the word, the town has heard from a few interested people. The first thing she does is ensure they know what life in this small town entails. "It's a beautiful town, everybody knows everybody," she said. "But it has its challenges."   Most food products must be flown in, resulting in prices as high as C$8 for two litres (4.2 pints) of milk. "And there's lots of times when we will actually go without stuff because we're waiting for the planes to come in, or stock might get bumped or the plane didn't come in that day."   As oil drives much of the industry around town, the plunging price of oil has taken an economic toll on residents in recent months, while services often available in larger municipalities, such as daycare, are non-existent.  And then there is the cold. "It's only hit 40 below [zero] about three times this winter," said Richards, calling it one of the warmest winters in recent memory. "Sometimes we will have a good 40 or 50 below spell for a week or two at a time. So you're either going to love it or hate it, I suppose."
MANILA — North Korea launched a missile early Friday — apparently to mark the 104th birthday of its founding leader, Kim Il-sung, the grandfather of the current leader, Kim Jong-un. But the test was a failure, according to American and South Korean defense officials.  The Pentagon confirmed, somewhat indirectly, that the test involved a ballistic missile when it called the launch a violation of United Nations Security Council resolutions that explicitly prohibit North Korea from using or testing ballistic missile technology.  The Defense Department said that its surveillance and radar systems "detected and tracked" the launch. It added that "the missile launched from North Korea did not pose a threat to North America."  The test occurred while Defense Secretary Ashton B. Carter was in the Philippines as part of a tour of Asia.
Morrison says spending, not revenue, is the problem - sound familiar?  Posted  Few doubt that the Federal Government's first budget was the beginning of the end for Joe Hockey and Tony Abbott. But new Treasurer Scott Morrison has jumped into the same hole and resumed digging, writes Matt Grudnoff.  We have a new Prime Minister, a new Treasurer and the promise of a new discussion on economics and tax reform.  I'm an economist, so this is pretty exciting.  Previously, I found the economic debate reactive and short-sighted, but also misinformed. The Abbott government seemed to have no idea of the causes of our economic difficulties and had even less idea about what the solutions might be.  Unable to grasp the basics, prime minister Tony Abbott and treasurer Joe Hockey blundered through different policies and then ran and hid when nothing seemed to work. Economic reform was put in the too-hard basket and the economy struggled to grow.  Even the most obvious of suggestions were battered aside, no matter who was offering advice. RBA Governor Glenn Stevens told the Government to take advantage of record low interest rates to embark on an infrastructure spending spree to improve growth and productivity. But such a program would involve more debt, and the Government had painted itself into an ideological corner where good economic policy couldn't reach.  But all this could be behind us. A new PM and Treasurer would surely bring new policies and drop the "nope, nope, nope" economic strategy. A fresh look at the problems facing Australia could see a new reform agenda.  Well, this economist at least had a new sense of hope.  On Tuesday night, ex-secretary of the Treasury and respected economist Ken Henry talked economy with Leigh Sales on 7.30. He was asked if the Australian federal budget had a revenue problem or a spending problem. In his answer, he compared revenue and spending in 2002 under the Howard government to today. Spending is now up by 1 per cent of GDP and revenue down by 1.5 per cent.  So effectively the problem is with both revenue and spending - but 60 per cent of the problem is shrinking revenue, while 40 per cent of the problem is growth in spending.  The next day our new Treasurer was talking with the Daily Telegraph saying we had a spending problem, not a revenue problem, and that he wanted to cut taxes further. That evening he went on ABC's 7.30 and again made the case that we had a spending problem.  Same question, two opposite answers from Henry and Morrison. So who's right?  A quick look at the budget figures shows that it's the respected economist and not the newly minted Treasurer. This is not a good sign. A large part of why Hockey and Abbott couldn't tackle Australia's economic problems was because they had built a fantasy that all the problems could be blamed on the Labor government's spending. It makes a good pitch to the party's ideologues, but it was never going to solve the problem.  If you don't get the cause of a problem right, your solutions aren't likely to fix it.  The first 'horror' budget was a spectacular case in point. The only way you balance a budget to abnormally low revenue is to cut things that the public really care about. That plan ended in tears, and few doubt that it was ultimately the beginning of the end of Hockey and Abbott.  But if we take Scott Morrison at his word, it seems like he's jumped into the same hole that Hockey and Abbott dug, and resumed digging. He is not only saying that he thinks that getting the budget back to surplus should be done entirely through spending cuts, he is also saying he wants to cut taxes, and cull revenue even further.  While it might seem obvious, what is often missed is that when a politician promises tax cuts they are also promising fewer services. Well, either that or a bigger deficit.  What our new Treasurer is promising is less money to pay for your health services. Less money to educate you. Less money if you're disabled. Less money if you're elderly. Less money for childcare and paid maternity leave, if you have kids. If you're one of the growing number of people looking, less money to help you find work. The list goes on.  And the lesson is clear: Fixing the budget by cutting services failed to work for Hockey and Abbott when they tried it in their first budget. Abbott's electability never recovered.  Ken Henry also said that the next round of tax reform needed to be revenue positive, not revenue negative. We need to increase taxes, not decrease them.  Increasing government revenue does not need to be difficult or disproportionally impact on the poor. The fall in revenue has much to do with the high income tax cuts paid for by the temporary revenue increase during the mining boom and the fact that so much tax is leaking out through things like super
Some years ago a movement started to replace proprietary office suites with open source solutions in an attempt to save money and regain control of IT spending.  Several government organizations in Germany, Spain and Italy replaced Microsoft Office with application suites such as Open Office and in some cases Windows with Linux distributions, and while no-one can fault these organizations for not trying hard, it appears in many cases the tide has turned, and many of the earlier pioneers are finding the costs of "free" software is not worth the return at all, particularly due to issues related to support, training, features and compatibility.  We reported recently on one such pioneer, the Munich city council, who has made the transition to Open Office and then Libre Office in 2003 and who is now planning a return to Microsoft Office, after finding that "… even 10 years after the start of the LiMuX migration, the users and users of the POR are dissatisfied," and that LiMux and LibreOffice was "far behind the current technical possibilities of established standard solutions".  It appears Brazil was another country caught up in anti-Microsoft sentiment. They also transitioned to Open Source office solutions in 2003 with the idea of reduce licensing costs while stimulating local companies to develop products for the government.  Unfortunately the lack of skilled professionals and scarcity of specialized providers meant the initiative lost momentum, and the government has now approved a massive procurement exercise of Microsoft products over the next few months to standardize the IT applications portfolio across departments and generate cost efficiencies.  Government departments will now be able to buy Microsoft products as required at previously negotiated prices within a 12 month period without the need to launch new tendering processes, with products most likely to be purchased by departments including Windows 10, Windows Server and the Office suite.  The move is just another example of a case where ideology got ahead of the need to get serious work done, and where procurers finally discovered that it does not pay to cheapen out on the tools needed to get the job done.
6.6K Shares  This post is by guest writer Anu Roy.  Sweet Then Sour  One of 2016's most highly anticipated adaptations, Cheese in the Trap is a 16 episode series based on the popular webtoon. The series follows a tempestuous relationship between the meek and shy Hong Seol (Kim Go Eun) with fourth year all-rounder and extremely popular yet mysterious Yoo Jung (Park Hae Jin). As they journey through the intense ups and downs of dating for twenty-year-olds amidst the chaotic life that college students face.  Cheese in the Trap had so much potential.  The first phrase that comes to mind when I'm reviewing this drama is — had so much potential — which is always a bittersweet feeling because I definitely enjoyed certain aspects of the show, yet I feel like it could have been so much better. Cheese in the Trap has a compelling storyline and gifted actors, but it still felt like a show that "almost" got the formula right.  Episodes 1-5 Review  The intro episodes of Cheese in the Trap quickly establish the cast of main characters through their behaviors and interactions. Hong Seol is timid, quiet, and afraid to openly express her thoughts. However, being quiet earns her the accolade of being secretly observant among her loud group of friends. The series immediately begins with a tense scene, where Hong Seol notices a sinister smile across Yoo Jung's lips as he spills water on a friend's skirt. So she immediately treats him with suspicion and distrust, especially when he's so admired and popular at their university.  It's also clear that Hong Seol always ends up in tricky, troublesome situations. In one instance, she gets dropped from a class she signed up for, and she suspects Yoo jung for pranking her. But she's awkward with Yoo Jung as acquaintances so she cannot openly bring it up with him.  Next, we meet the Baek siblings — the blunt and thuggish Baek In Ho (Seo Kang Joon) and his larger-than-life, obnoxious, over dramatic sister Baek In Ha (Lee Sung Kyung). The Baek siblings have ties with Yoo Jung's family, but have been cut off, so they must fend for themselves. The tension between them and Jung escalates when In Ho crosses paths with Seol and warns her against dating Jung, who is known to be cold and unresponsive while interacting with the Baek siblings.  Slowly, there is positive progression for Hong Seol and Yoo Jung's relationship. And because other girls are jealous of the attention Yoo Jung shows Seol, she's always put in uncomfortable situations. One night, one of the jealous classmates directs a drunkard towards the desolated building that Hong Seol is studying in, and the police arrive to see Hong Seol's arm bleeding from the wound left by the drunkard waving his bottle around. However, Yoo Jung is always trying to help Seol get out of these problems and goes out of his way to protect her. As Seol notices him trying to get closer, she eventually gives in and accepts his offer to spend time together.  However, the flirtatious unpredictability of her time spent with Yoo jung will have to wait as Seol continuously has problems of her own. She's always doing other people favors — be it her mother's plea to move four hours away from her apartment to reduce household costs or forsaking sleep to finish a presentation that no one else in her group is motivated to do. I particularly enjoyed Hong Seol's self-narrations; they provide the viewer with insights into her mind and her personality. She's constantly stressed from the slack she cuts everyone else, and she does so partly out of benevolence and partly because she's not assertive.  Soon, we also see the triangle between In Ho, Seol, and Jung begins to emerge. As In Ho moves into Seol's neighborhood and spend more time together, they develop an open, honest friendship that is refreshing to watch compared to the intense, unpredictable relationship she shares with Jung, despite the fact that they start dating.  The first few episodes definitely pack in a lot of interactions between the various characters, but its true merit lies within its focus on the lead pair, Seol and Jung. I really enjoyed how Cheese in the Trap juxtaposes the moments they spend together, where Jung is polite, soft-spoken and gentle, against the moments he deals with others in a cold, emotionless way. It makes Jung a complicated but intriguing lead with an unanswered question of which is the real him.  Episodes 6-10 Review  These episodes of Cheese in the Trap dig deeper into the character transformations and the complications of Seol and Jung's relationship despite the obvious chemistry they share. Seol is constantly caught between feeling affectionate towards Jung for helping her and caring for her, and feeling upset when she un
Community Rating:  Community Rating: 4.491 / 5 ( 113 votes ) Click here to view ratings and comments. Oracle Printed Card Name: Wake Thrasher Mana Cost: Converted Mana Cost: 3 Types: Creature — Merfolk Soldier Card Text: Whenever a permanent you control becomes untapped, Wake Thrasher gets +1/+1 until end of turn. Flavor Text: Anyone who thinks merrows have more brains than brawn has never been run over by one. P/T: 1 / 1 Expansion: Eventide Rarity: Rare All Sets: Card Number: 31 Artist: Jesper Ejsing Rulings If permanents you control become untapped during your untap step, Wake Thresher's ability will trigger that many times. However, since no player gets priority during the untap step, those abilities wait to be put on the stack until your upkeep starts. At that time, all your "beginning of upkeep" triggers will also trigger. You can put them and Wake Thresher's abilities on the stack in any order.
Republican nominee Donald Trump gained 17 points in roughly two weeks, according to the Reuters online tracking poll.  On July 14, 2016, Trump was 15 points behind Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton 46.5 percent to 31.5 percent. However as of July 26, 2016, Trump closed that 15 point gap and is now up two points over Clinton, 40.2 percent to 38.5 percent.  The Reuters/IPSOS polling data was fairly consistent during the Republican primaries — keeping Trump in the lead from February through May, which proved to be accurate.  Additionally, IPSOS received a high polling accuracy score — an "A-" — from FiveThirtyEight.
Grounding of the Queen Elizabeth 2 (response) - 26/06/2009  The Rest of the Story  Nick Perugini  Last month we brought you the story of the famous Cunard cruise liner Queen Elizabeth 2 (QE2), which grounded on 7 August 1992 off the coast of Martha's Vineyard and the state of Rhode Island. Captain Lusk stated that the US judicial system arrived at the wrong decision regarding who was at fault for the QE2 grounding and suggested that the US agency for this survey, the US Coast and Geodetic Survey, predecessor to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), should have investigated and determined the shoal depth. On this page we give NOAA the opportunity to respond to this.   View Larger Map   Last month we brought you the story of the famous Cunard cruise liner Queen Elizabeth 2(QE2), which grounded on 7 August 1992 off the coast of Martha's Vineyard and the state of Rhode Island. Captain Lusk stated that the US judicial system arrived at the wrong decision regarding who was at fault for the QE2 grounding and suggested that the US agency for this survey, the US Coast and Geodetic Survey, predecessor to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), should have investigated and determined the shoal depth. On the next few pages we give NOAA the opportunity to respond to this.  Grounding incidentsinvolving nautical charts are ex-tremely rare. However, when they do occur, the legal issue usually boils down to whether the hydrographic office was negligent by not con-ducting surveys or applying information to the chart in con-formance with their stated standards. The counter argument involves whether the mariner's actions were the principal cause of the grounding. In the case of the QE2 grounding, there are arguments to be made on both sides. In my opinion, captain Lusk offers a one-dimensional narrative of the QE2 grounding that is grossly incomplete. Mariners and hydrographers need to understand 'the rest of the story' before arriving at their own conclusion about the grounding of the QE2.  What Happened?  It was the final evening of a five-day pleasure cruise for the 1,824 pas-sengers aboard the UK passenger vessel QE2. Suddenly, the 963-foot ocean liner shook with unexpected vibration. Officers and crew on the bridge recalled two separate periods of shaking and rumblings. The mas-ter recollected that the bridge equipment rattled and shook as if it were in heavy seas. Many of the pas-sengers felt a change in the ship's motion – some thought that a severe impact had occurred. Unfortunately, there was significant damage to the bottom of the QE2. Four of the 36 double-bottom tanks that had been empty were now filled with water and open to the sea. The US Coast Guard was notified and the ship was ordered to anchor in Rhode Island Sound, some 20 miles southeast of Newport, Rhode Island.   Anchorage to Grounding  At 21:24, after weighing anchor and manoeuvring to the west and then to the south rounding the northern shore of Martha's Vineyard, the QE2 increased speed to approximately 25 knots. Figure 1 shows the approximate outbound track of the QE2. The ship was generally following its inbound reciprocal course, heading approximately west-south-west (235° True). At 21:44, about two-thirds of the way out of Vineyard Sound, the QE2 passed the 'NA' buoy to star-board. With the buoy abeam, the pilot altered course to the right about 15° and was now steering a course of 250°. The pilot later testified that he intended to maintain that course until he was approximately 2 miles south of the south-western end of Cuttyhunk Island, and then steer 270° to where he would disembark. The pilot had not told the master or the watch officer of his course change, nor of his intent to alter course to 270° when the south-western point of Cuttyhunk Island was bearing north. Figure 2 illustrates the misunderstanding between the pilot and the captain regarding the outbound course.  The QE2's second officer plotted the new course on the ship's nautical chart and saw that the new track-line did not coincide with the original course as laid out by the ship's navigator. The second officer noted that the projected ship's track-line crossed over a 34-foot rocky shoal area approximately 7.5 miles down range in Rhode Island Sound north of the shoal called Brown's Ledge. At a speed of nearly 25 knots, the QE2 would pass over the shoal area in about 18 minutes. Not knowing that the pilot intended to alter coursebefore reaching the shoal, the second officer immediately notified the first officer, who in turn informed the master. After being made aware of
Drew Drechsel is a dominate force in the Ninja Warrior world! Not only American Ninja Warrior, but Sauske in Japan, National Ninja League, Wolfpack Ninja Tour along with others! Here are some videos that helped us analyze Drew's technique and break it down to show you tips on how to increase your speed and endurance! We look at Drew doing the salmon ladder, laches, and how he attacks obstacles for speed and efficiency!
40 armed conflicts were active in 2014, the highest number of conflicts since 1999 and an increase of 18% when compared to the 34 conflicts active in 2013. New data from the Uppsala Conflict Data Program (UCDP) shows an increase in both the number of active conflicts but also in the number of battle-related deaths in these conflicts.  In 2014, the conflict in Syria and the escalating violence in countries like Iraq, Afghanistan, Nigeria and Ukraine, resulted in the highest yearly death toll in the post-Cold War period.  In an article in the Journal of Peace Research, the UCDP describes the recent trend in armed conflicts and battle-related deaths. During 2014, 40 armed conflicts, causing at least 25 battle-related deaths, were active. After the end of the Cold War, the number of conflicts in the world decreased substantially. However, for the last ten years the UCDP has recorded an uneven, yet clearly visible upward trend. In particular, the number of conflicts involving troops from other states, so called internationalized conflicts, has increased.  'Nevertheless, this ten-year period is also where we find the year with the lowest number of active conflicts in the post-Cold War period', says Therése Pettersson, project leader at the UCDP. 'This illustrates the variations in the number of conflicts, and the difficulties of speaking of the long term trend'.  The number of conflicts which are defined as wars, resulting in at least 1000 battle-related deaths per year, has also increased, from six in 2013 to 11 in 2014. This represents the largest relative increase since the early 1960s. In recent years, the number of battle-related deaths has increased dramatically, largely due to the developments in Syria. In 2014, the UCDP recorded the highest number of battle-related deaths since the end of the Cold War.  'Besides Syria, we have also seen violence escalating in several other conflicts, such as Iraq, Afghanistan, Nigeria and Ukraine', Therése Pettersson says. 'Even when excluding Syria, 2014 witnessed the highest number of battle-related deaths in 15 years'.  One positive development is that 10 peace agreements were signed during 2014, four more than in 2013.  'We have for example seen a historic agreement signed in the Philippines', says Peter Wallensteen, UCDP's Director. 'Unfortunately, several attempts at negotiations in the most violent conflicts have collapsed, one reason being the tensions between the West and Russia'.  Explore further: High number of fatalities despite unchanged level of armed conflicts  More information: Uppsala Conflict Data Program: www.pcr.uu.se/research/ucdp/?languageId=3
Page of PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice). date: 26 September 2018  Influence of Labeling and Incivility on Climate Change Communication  Summary and Keywords Labels play an important role in opinion formation, helping to actively construct perceptions and reality, and to place individuals into context with others. As a highly complex issue, climate change invites a range of different opinions and dialogues about its causes, impacts, and action required. Much work has been published in the academic literature aiming to categorize differences of opinion about climate change using labels. However, the debate about labels acts as a distraction to more fundamental and pressing issues of policy response. In addition, the undercurrent of incivility present in the climate change debate also contributes towards a hostile and unconstructive conflict. This is an evolving area of academic enquiry. Recent work has examined how the different labels of climate change opinions are constructed, used in practice, and portrayed differently in the public and policy spheres. The growing number of categorization systems used in the climate debate are also argued to have implications for the science-policy interface, creating a polarized debate involving many different actors and interfaces. Moving away from unhelpful use and construction of labels that lead to incivility would enable constructive and fruitful dialogue across this polarized debate. A way forward would be to explore further the role of underlying motivations and rationales as to why these different opinions about climate change come to exist in the first place. Focusing on potential overlaps in perceptions and rationales may encourage constructive discussion amongst actors previously engaged in purposefully antagonistic exchange on climate change. Keywords: climate change debate, labels, opinion, incivility, communication  In 1942, the sociologist Robert K. Merton introduced an influential conceptualization of scientific norms. These informal rules included communalism–that scientists should all be able to access scientific knowledge; universalism–that all scientists should be able to contribute to the creation of that knowledge; and disinterestedness–that all scientists should act for the greater good, rather than personal gain. But most notably among these Mertonian norms, is the emphasized ideal of organized skepticism. By way of this norm, all scientific claims should be subject to "an ongoing process of questioning, hypothesizing, validation, and refutation" (Sarewitz, 2000, p. 84) before they may be accepted. Even once they are accepted, they must continue to be questioned should new evidence emerge. The positivist tradition of contemporary science is strongly based on the idea that skepticism is a fundamental basis of the scientific process. Importantly, it emphasizes that conflicting arguments should be based either on flaws in existing evidence or on the production of new, contrary evidence. In the context of climate change, scientific debates may focus on overarching topics or specific physical relationships. Topics that have been debated include, for example, the relationship between sunspots and climate change (Huntingford & Fowler, 2008), the impact of clouds on climate feedback mechanisms (Baum, Haqq-Misra, & Karmosky, 2012), or whether or not specific weather events may be attributable to longer term climate change (Parmesan & Yohe, 2003). Disagreement about climate change is not surprising. As Merton first articulated, debate and the continued questioning of all findings and conclusions are fundamental parts of the scientific process. Climate change is a complex issue to communicate, particularly to non-scientists. This is additionally challenging when it is assumed that simply communicating about the science of climate change is sufficient to increase understanding, engagement, and willingness to act. This is known as the "technocratic model" or the "information deficit model" (Hulme, 2009; Sturgis & Allum, 2004); however, this linear approach often raises significant challenges in communication and debate on climate change. This is because viewpoints on contentious topics are not solely decided by evidence and may be influenced by many other factors (as we outline below). Nonetheless, the expectations of participants in the climate debate, notably decision-makers, can lead to an over-reliance on evidence-based policy that cannot necessarily be fulfilled, particularly where large uncertainties are involved and where decision-making processes are highly context-dependent (Dessai, Hulme, Lempert, & Pielke, 2009). Research into the boundaries of the science-policy interface has enabled a deeper understanding of how to manage the challenges that emerge in the climate debate (Jasanoff, 1990, 2004). Science that is used to inform decision-making needs to be perceived as credible (e.g. that it is rigorously assessed and reviewed), salient (e.g. that it is relevant to debate participants such as decision-makers), and legitimate (
Orlando City is winless in three matches for the first time in 2017 but it was a great effort and a solid point against Sporting Kansas City on Saturday. We're here to poke around in the leftovers of that game and tell you what we thought of what transpired. We'll give you our game MVP picks as well. And the Pride got in the win column this week, with a 3-1 victory over the first-place North Carolina Courage.  Here to talk more about that is Pride striker Chioma Ubogagu, who jumped on board this week to talk about her first goal in purple, the team's first win, what Marta brought to the team's culture, the rough early season schedule, the brand new players' association for non-allocated NWSL players, and much more.  We're also talking about OCB's 2-0 win at FC Cincinnati on Saturday and the play of Pierre Da Silva, Richie Laryea, and Seb Hines. And we've got our key match-ups and score predictions for Orlando City's upcoming matches against San Jose and NYCFC.  It's a jam-packed show once again!  Here's how the pod unfolded:  0:13- Orlando City drew 2-2 against Sporting Kansas City and we're breaking it down. Plus we've got our Man of the Match picks for you. We're also talking Pride-Courage and OCB-Cincy.  37:47- Chioma Ubogagu! Sunday's first of three goal scorers for the Pride talks about the first goal, the first win, coming over from Houston and a whole lot more.  53:32- Our key match-ups and score predictions for Orlando City's upcoming games at San Jose Earthquakes and vs. New York City FC.  We'll be back next week to recap both of the Lions' games, plus the Pride at the Reign and whatever else we can think of to talk about.  Got a question? Just tweet it to us @TheManeLand with the hashtag #AskTMLPC.
This post originally ran on Robert Reich's website.  Why is there so little discussion about one of Bernie Sanders's  most important proposals – to tax financial speculation?  Buying and selling stocks and bonds in order to beat others who  are buying and selling stocks and bonds is a giant zero-sum game that wastes  countless resources, uses up the talents of some of the nation's best and  brightest, and subjects financial market to unnecessary risk.  High-speed traders who employ advanced technologies in order to get information  a millisecond before other traders get it don't make financial markets more  efficient. They make them more vulnerable to debacles like the "Flash  Crash" of May 2010.  Wall Street Insiders who trade on confidential information unavailable to  small investors don't improve the productivity of financial markets. They just  rig the game for themselves.  Bankers who trade in ever more complex derivatives – making bets  on bets – don't add real value. They only make the system more vulnerable to big  losses, as occurred in the financial crisis of 2008.  All of which makes Bernie Sanders's proposal for a speculation  tax right on the mark.  He wants to tax stock trades at a rate of 0.5 percent (a trade  of $1,000 would cost of $5), and bond trades at 0.1 percent.  The tax would reduce incentives for high-speed trading, insider  deal-making, and short-term financial betting. (Hillary Clinton also favors a  financial transactions tax but only on high-speed trading.)  Another big plus: Given the gargantuan size of the financial  market and the huge volume of trading occurring within it every day, this tiny  tax would generate lots of revenue.  Even a 0.01 percent transaction tax  (a basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point, or 0.01 percent) would  raise $185 billion over 10 years, according to the nonpartisan Tax Policy Center.  Sanders's 0.5 percent tax could thereby finance public investments  that enlarge the economic pie rather than merely rearrange its slices – like  tuition-free public education.  After all, Americans pay sales taxes on all sorts of goods and  services yet Wall Street traders pay no sales taxes on the stocks and bonds  they buy.  Which helps explains why the financial industry generates about 30 percent of America's corporate profits but pays only about 18 percent of corporate taxes.  Naysayers led by the financial industry's lobbyists (the Financial Services Roundtable and  Financial Markets Association) warn that even a small tax on financial transactions would drive trading overseas, since financial trades can  easily be done anywhere.  Baloney. The U.K. has had a tax on stock trades for decades yet remains one  of the world's financial powerhouses. Incidentally, that tax raises about 3  billion pounds yearly (the equivalent of $30 billion in an economy the size of  the U.S.), which is pure gravy for Britain's budget.  At least 28 other countries also have such a tax, and the European Union is well on the way  to implementing one.  Industry lobbyists also claim the costs of the tax will burden small  investors such as retirees, business owners, and average savers.  Wrong again. The tax wouldn't be a burden if it reduces the volume  and frequency of trading – which is the whole point.  In fact, the tax is highly progressive. The Tax Policy Center estimates that 75 percent of it would be  paid by the richest fifth of taxpayers, and 40 percent by the top 1 percent.  It's hardly a radical idea.  Between 1914 and 1966, the United States itself taxed financial  transactions. During the Great Depression, John Maynard Keynes urged wider use  of such a tax to reduce excessive speculation by financial traders. After the Wall Street crash of October 1987, even the first  President George Bush endorsed the idea.  Americans are fed up with Wall Street's financial games.  Excessive speculation contributed to the near meltdown of 2008 – which cost  millions of people their jobs, savings, and homes.  So why is it only Bernie Sanders who's calling for a financial  transactions tax? Why aren't politicians of all stripes supporting it? And why  isn't it a major issue in the 2016 election?  Because a financial transactions tax directly threatens a major  source of Wall Street's revenue. And, if you hadn't noticed, the Street uses a  portion of its vast revenues to gain political clout.  So even though it's an excellent idea championed by a major candidate, a financial
About this mod Removes the visual and audio effects from Dark Mode. Permissions and credits Credits and distribution permission Other user's assets All the assets in this file belong to the author, or are from free-to-use modder's resources  Upload permission You are not allowed to upload this file to other sites under any circumstances  Modification permission You must get permission from me before you are allowed to modify my files to improve it  Conversion permission You are not allowed to convert this file to work on other games under any circumstances  Asset use permission You must get permission from me before you are allowed to use any of the assets in this file  Asset use permission in mods/files that are being sold You are not allowed to use assets from this file in any mods/files that are being sold, for money, on Steam Workshop or other platforms  Asset use permission in mods/files that earn donation points You must get permission to earn Donation Points for your mods if they use my assets Author notes 0 File credits 0 Donation Points system This mod is not opted-in to receive Donation Points Changelogs Version 2.1 Corrected error for steel swords Re-uploaded with changed title. No content change.  Version 2.0 EE Version added  Version 1.1 Added alternative version that gives a vitality regen bonus to compensate for loss of Dark Mode bonus   This mod was written before the toolkit came out, when there were limitations on what could be done, and it wasn't possible to remove the effects without also removing the curse/bonus.   Now that the toolkit is out, there's a better version here;  http://witcher2.nexusmods.com/mods/649//?   so I recommend you use that instead, unless you're hitting compatibility issues.   ------------------------------------------   Two versions are provided - one for 2.0/2,1 and one for EE.  Warning - using the 2.0/2.1 version with EE may result in problems with other swords in the game.   This mod removes the dark mode effects - black smoke, black/pink filter and stomach rumbling noise when you use your Dark Mode sword.  It also removes the vitality bonus/curse provided by these swords. Two versions of the mod are therefore provided.   No Dark Mode Effects - No Bonus  Removes the visual/audio effects AND the bonus/curse. Nothing else is changed.   No Dark Mode Effects - with extra bonus.  As above, but adds +1 vitality regen in combat to compensate for the lost bonus.   To install: Copy the files into the folder CookedPC/items.  If the items subfolder doesn't exist, create it.   To uninstall:  Remove the files.  def_item_swordsilver.xml  def_item_swordsteel.xml  def_stats_item_swordsilver.xml (only if you used the "with bonus" version)  def_stats_item_swordsteel.xml (only if you used the "with bonus" version)
Missing sailor's wife gives evidence at coronial inquest  Updated  The first day of a coronial inquest into last year's disappearance of three sailors off Townsville in north Queensland has heard evidence from the skipper's wife that her husband was well prepared for the trip.  Skipper Derek Batton, Peter Tunstead and his brother James Tunstead sailed out of Airlie Beach on the Kaz 2 catamaran on the April 15, 2007.  Five days later the 10-metre sailing boat was found drifting outside the Great Barrier Reef off Townsville with no sign of the three men.  Their wives and children have flown from Perth for the inquest.  The first witness to give evidence this morning - Jennifer Batton - said she and her husband had previously taken the Kaz 2 out on two trips with no problems.  She told the inquest her husband and neighbour Peter Tunstead had taken 10 weeks to plan the trip and they had allowed six to eight weeks and planned to stay reasonably close to the shore.  Topics: law-crime-and-justice, missing-person, accidents, maritime, disasters-and-accidents, townsville-4810, airlie-beach-4802, qld, wa  First posted
Summary  Texas Gov. Rick Perry cites partly cloudy statistics to back up his boast that Texas is doing just fine cleaning its air on its own — without the EPA.  Perry boasts that "we cleaned up our air in Texas more than any other state, during the decade of the 2000s." But that's based on homemade statistics compiled by Texas officials, who only counted measures from Houston and Dallas and left out cities where there was less improvement. State officials say their method is "scientifically defensible," but EPA and environmental groups disagree.  While no one debates that Texas made significant strides in the 2000s, it's also true that with some of the nation's worst air quality, it had a lot of room to improve. And despite its gains, Texas' air still ranks among the most polluted in the U.S. in a number of categories.  Perry said that in Texas, "we lowered our nitrogen oxide levels by 58 percent." But that's counting only "point source" emissions, largely from industrial and power plants. Total nitrogen oxide emissions — including those from "mobile sources," such as cars — have been reduced by a far more modest 16 percent in Texas, according to EPA calculations. That overall reduction is lower than the national average.  Analysis  Perry has cultivated an adversarial relationship with the Environmental Protection Agency going all the way back to his days as Texas' agriculture commissioner. Perry contends the "mandates and overreaching regulation" of the EPA cost Texas jobs and that Texas is better equipped to tackle air quality issues than "a centralized, all-knowing, one-size-fits-all federal government." And, he says, Texas has done just fine cleaning up its air without the EPA's interference (a claim many environmental groups in Texas contest).  One of Perry's most heated battles with the EPA is over global warming and the Obama administration's use of the Clean Air Act to regulate greenhouse gas emissions from the state's many oil refineries and power plants. Perry is skeptical of scientists who say global warming is a man-made problem. Tensions reached a boil when, earlier this year, the EPA announced it was taking over control of the greenhouse gas permitting in Texas because the state refused to implement its rules. Texas has led several other states in a legal challenge to the global warming regulations. The issue is still pending in federal court.  At a town hall event in Derry, N.H., on Sept. 30., an audience member asked about global warming, and Perry repeated his skepticism and defended Texas' environmental record:  Perry: And we in Texas have addressed this. You realize that we cleaned up our air in Texas more than any other state, Mike, during the decade of the 2000s.  The audience member then suggested that was due to EPA regulations.  Perry: No, it wasn't the EPA regulations. As a matter of fact, they tried to come into Texas after we cleaned up our air and take it over and what they'll do is just kill a bunch of jobs and won't clean up the air at all. We lowered our ozone levels by 27 percent during the decade of the 2000s and we lowered our nitrogen oxide levels by 58 percent.  Did Texas really outpace all other states in cleaning up air pollution, and do it in spite of the EPA? Did Perry really cut nitrogen oxide by 58 percent? Here we look at Perry's claims one at a time.  Texas Tops in Cleaning Its Air?  Let's start with Perry's claim that Texas cleaned up its air more than any other state during the decade of the 2000s.  This claim is based on a report, "Texas Air Quality Successes," from the state government's Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, which said that Texas lowered its ozone levels by 27 percent.  TCEQ report: From 2000 to 2010, ozone levels in Texas have decreased by 27 percent statewide. By comparison, the rest of the nation averaged only a 14 percent decrease in ozone levels over this same time period.  This is a TCEQ custom-made statistic that may not mean what you think it does. The EPA doesn't report air quality at the state-wide level. Rather, it uses more localized measures to track ozone levels, relying on a series of monitors placed around various metropolitan areas.  The TCEQ did not attempt to calculate some state average and compare it with other states. Among all the monitors in the state, it selected the one with the fourth-highest eight-hour ozone concentration. It was then averaged with the fourth-highest monitor values from two previous years. That then became Texas' statewide value. All of the monitors ended up coming from either Houston or Dallas, TCEQ officials said. That value was then compared with an average of fourth-highest monitor values from the beginning of the decade, and ultimately with other states using the same methodology.  According to this TCEQ measure
A long, long time ago when I was mastering Linux I created three cheat sheets about GNU fileutils, GNU shellutils and GNU textutils. I'd keep them in front of me at all times, and I quickly memorized which commands did what.  A few days ago I remembered about them and decided to publish them on my blog but it turns out fileutils, shellutils and textutils were merged in GNU coreutils in 2003; so I thought why not create a new cheat sheet that lists all the utilities in coreutils along with their short descriptions.  Here is the GNU coreutils cheat sheet that lists all programs that are in coreutils:  This cheat sheet is really useful if you're learning Linux and want to have a quick overview of all the available commands!  Bonus: Here are some of the commands that I used to create the cheat sheet:  $ curl 'http://www.gnu.org/software/coreutils/manual/coreutils.html' 2>/dev/null | grep 'h3 class' | grep 'class="command"' | sed 's/.*class="command">//' | sed 's|</span></samp>||' | sed 's|</h3>||' | grep ':' | sort  This one extracts the command descriptions from the coreutils manual.  And:  $ wget 'http://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/coreutils/coreutils-8.13.tar.gz' $ gunzip < coreutils-8.13.tar.gz | tar -vx $ cd coreutils-8.13/src $ find . -name '*.c' | sort | xargs head -1  This one extracts the command descriptions from the program C source files.  Also take a look at other cheat sheets that I've created. They include awk, ed, sed, perl, screen, bash, and many others.
Click to play YouTube Video  One other thing I've noticed that has me concerned is the appearance of the metallic oven. Goboof's website shows a stainless steal color, while the image on GotVape shows a copper'ish color (I'm am not sure if the two units depicted are using the same material).Edit...I just found a usage video...not the most informative, but it at least gives us an idea of the Alfa's performance.
After a bizarre week, Jim McElwain is out at Florida, meaning one of the top 10 jobs in college football is open. The move means there could be as many as a half-dozen new head coaches in the SEC in 2018. Let's examine 10 candidates UF may consider. I think the Gators' options fit into three categories: the connected guys, the upstarts and the big names they might be able to woo.  The Connected Guys with UF ties or local roots  Dan Mullen, Mississippi State: He's an obvious choice. First-year Florida AD Scott Stricklin was his boss in Starkville. Mullen is a terrific offensive coach and that's something that should play well at a place that has been dreadful pretty much since Mullen left Gainesville almost a decade ago. He's 67–44 at a program that is the toughest to win at in the SEC West, and the Bulldogs are 6–2 this year. It's hard to think he can do much better in Starkville than he already has, and that includes two top-20 finishes in his eight previous seasons. On two different occasions he tried to get the Miami job, but was unable. It's hard to think he'd pass if Florida came within reach. Word is former Florida athletic director Jeremy Foley wasn't a big fan of Mullen's, but would he try and stand in the way of him getting this job or still have the juice to do that?  Willie Taggart, Oregon: A South Florida native who is like the third Harbaugh brother, Taggart won at Western Kentucky and then won at USF, leaving Charlie Strong a stocked program, and he's done a very nice job pumping life back into the Ducks in his first year in Eugene. He and his staff are recruiting exceptionally well. Would he actually be tempted to come back home after moving his young family across the country for just one year? I'm not sure he could say no.  Scott Frost, UCF: A Chip Kelly protégé, he's tearing it up in year two at UCF, which at 7–0 is the Group of Five's last unbeaten team. His name has come up often as a possible answer if his alma mater Nebraska pulls the plug on Mike Riley (I suspect it will). I'm told Frost might be more intrigued by a program with a stronger, much more fertile recruiting base than Nebraska—somewhere he can get tons of speed to fuel his system. A place like Florida would make a lot of sense. A question among some UF folks is whether the 42-year-old Frost is ready for this big stage. In retrospect, many realized, McElwain wasn't cut out for the job temperament-wise, and that figures to be something Florida will be mindful of in its search process.  Charlie Strong, USF: Another former Urban Meyer assistant, Strong fizzled at Texas after three tumultuous seasons. He's doing well again in his first season at USF and is very well-connected around the state. He played a vital role in Meyer building a powerhouse at Florida, and Gator brass knows how well-respected he was inside the program. That should count for something. Does UF want someone more drawn to the spotlight than Strong? It just got rid of a guy who was not very comfortable under constant media scrutiny. Would it bring in another to replace him?  The Big Names  Justin Fuente, Virginia Tech: He's 17–5 with the Hokies after turning a downtrodden Memphis football program into a winner. That was impressive. Fuente is also not paid a fortune by FBS coaching standards, but has a very good situation in Blacksburg working for a well-regarded AD in Whit Babcock. He's got a good job now, but UF is an even better job. If you're the Gators, you've gotta kick the tires on this one.  Gary Patterson, TCU: One of the best defensive coaches in football, Patterson has the Horned Frogs rolling. He's done wonders there and they've upgraded the facilities dramatically for him. They've even built him a statue. Still, it's no secret that he'd listen if it's a program that he felt gave him a much better chance at winning national titles.  Kevin Sumlin, Texas A&M: His résumé and experience is better than most of the guys on this list. He's likely to be looking for another job this winter. He's proven he can recruit very well in the SEC against anyone. He's 49–24, has never done worse than 8–5 at A&M and did lead the Aggies to their first top-five finish in over 50 years.  Chip Kelly: The biggest free-agent name in coaching. Kelly is as sharp and innovative as any offensive mind in football. His offense would be scary with access to the speed you can recruit at Florida.
Success with Learning Disabilities: Special Education Programs and Vision Therapy Going into 6th grade he will have help in class for his reading instead of a special education class ... [More] Dr. X was recommended by the head of the Department of Special Education where we live. [More] She has had speech, special ed., O.T. and PT. in school � since starting Vision Therapy, for the first time she has received satisfactory on her report card. [More] A study done of 6,000 students ... 93 percent of those who were in some sort of special education program suffered from vision problems ... [More] I believe that my son would be in special education if it were not for Vision Therapy.[More] I am writing you professionally so that my words may encourage others and give them hope through Vision Therapy. My background is in the field of Special Education. I have three credentials in the field of learning handicaps and a Masters of Education specializing in learning handicaps. [More] Over this past 18 months, A.B. has progressed farther than any of us could imagine. He even celebrates how his eyes have improved. Is this a matter of just maturation, a skeptic would ask? Not if you could have seen his eye tracking upon evaluation ... and seen it now! [More] Ben has done amazingly well with Vision Therapy. After five months, his reading abilities have improved. He is now reading at grade level. [More] Your work with my son Evan has proven invaluable. It has made the difference between success and failure in his life. [More] I could not be happier with the changes we see. Christian is excited about reading and all the mechanics are in place for writing.[More] ... he has graduated from the Special Ed program ... a confident reader ... straight A's in school! That's a far cry from the days when he would lunge to the floor, book in hand, crying, "I can't do this, it's too hard." [More] With the Vision Therapy sessions and the homework from Dr. X, along with the special education program at his school, Ty has not only met his scholastic goals, but has exceeded his teacher's and our expectations. [More] I wanted to tell you how impressed I am with the results of doing Vision Therapy with my 9-year old son. ...his Occupational Therapist noticed a major improvement ... after he had done about 2 months ... Her comment was ... "something really came together neuro-integratively." [More] Now, after Vision Therapy, Joshua can catch and throw a ball with ease, walk a straight line without losing his balance, and can read a page in a book without the words skipping all over the page. I hope parents, teachers, therapists, and pediatricians will take another look at Vision Therapy, and ask people who have taken advantage of the service how they liked it. [More] After teaching learning disabled children for over 15 years, I am in awe of what I am witnessing. I have never seen such a remarkable change so quickly in a child who has struggled for years. [More] Now, she can read! ... and is rapidly catching up on the things she missed the last year of school. ... She can read without following the lines with a ruler or her finger. [More] Our lives changed dramatically and Matt's schoolwork improved drastically. He was taken out of his second grade Special Education Program. [More]  Read full stories below. Anthony had his best report card last quarter. He received 4 Bs and 2Cs. In 5th grade, he was in a special education class for reading. Going into 6th grade he will have help in class for his reading instead of a special education class outside of the regular classroom.  By Chris Sandoval My son was having trouble in school. He would flip letters in words. He would also turn letters around. I thought he had a severe reading problem. Dr. X was recommended by the head of the Department of Special Education where we live. I had my son tested by Dr. X and I found out it was something that could be corrected through Vision Therapy. My son has shown great improvement. His reading has improved as well as his confidence in himself. My son is seven years old. I feel at this young age he will continue to improve.  Lisa A. Leach I am thoroughly pleased with the Vision Therapy Krystin has received. Krystin has been diagnosed with cerebral palsy (mild). She has had speech, special ed., O.T. and PT. in school and at a private clinic for five- and six-year-olds. She is in fourth grade this school year. This past school year since starting Vision Therapy, for the first time she has received satisfactory on her report card. The reason we started Vision Therapy was because Krystin would have all the letters in her spelling words, but would have them out of order. Then, being diagnosed with her eyes not always working
Get daily updates directly to your inbox Subscribe Thank you for subscribing See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email  An exploding egg caused an entire floor of a block of flats to be evacuated.  Crews from Whitehill, Offerton and King Street fire stations were called to Offerton Road, Offerton, at 7.20am today (Tuesday).  A woman had been cooking an egg for breakfast, but left it on the heat too long and it exploded and caught alight.  The smoke alarm sounded and a security guard at the flats called 999.  Six flats containing six people were evacuated.  Firefighters found the flames already burnt out and vented the flat of smoke.  About 30 minutes later crews were called to Branksome Road, Heaton Mersey.  A man, woman and boy were preparing for the school run when a fuse in the electrical consumer unit overheated and caused a fire.  They escaped the home before crews arrived.  Damage was limited to the unit area, but the property again needed venting.  And yesterday afternoon (Monday) an electrical fault caused a fridge to catch fire in a garage on Peacock Drive, Heald Green.  The man living at the house used a hosepipe to douse the flames before firefighters arrived to finish the job.
Hellknight Source Adventurer's Guide pg. 90, Inner Sea World Guide pg. 278  Not all who start as novice armigers have what it takes to become a full-fledged Hellknight, but those who do receive a wide array of abilities as they grow more powerful. While the individual powers and focus of a particular Hellknight vary according to his order, all Hellknights are universally feared and respected in regions where they maintain a presence. Most Hellknights are lawful neutral and proudly avoid being "tainted" by distractions such as good or evil, but some who rise in power shift toward tyrannical and cruel natures. Requirements To qualify to become a Hellknight, a character must fulfill the following criteria.   Alignment: Any lawful.  Armor Proficiency: Must be proficient with heavy armor.  Base Attack Bonus: +5.  Skills: Intimidate 5 ranks, Knowledge (planes) 2 ranks.  Special: The character must slay a devil with Hit Dice greater than his character level. This victory must be witnessed by a Hellknight. Class Skills The Hellknight's class skills are Intimidate (Cha), Knowledge (local) (Int), Perception (Wis), Ride (Dex), and Sense Motive (Wis).   Skill Points at each Level: 2 + Int modifier.  Hit Die: d10. Class Features Level Base Attack Bonus Fort Save Ref Save Will Save Special 1st +1 +1 +0 +0 Aura of law, detect chaos, order, smite chaos 1/day 2nd +2 +1 +1 +1 Discern lies, Hellknight armor 1 3rd +3 +2 +1 +1 1st discipline, force of will 1 4th +4 +2 +1 +1 Smite chaos 2/day 5th +5 +3 +2 +2 Hellknight armor 2 6th +6 +3 +2 +2 2nd discipline, force of will 2 7th +7 +4 +2 +2 Lawbringer, smite chaos 3/day 8th +8 +4 +3 +3 Hellknight armor 3 9th +9 +5 +3 +3 3rd discipline, force of will 3, infernal armor 10th +10 +5 +3 +3 Hell's knight, smite chaos 4/day  The following are class features of the Hellknight.   Aura of Law (Ex): A Hellknight's lawful aura (see the detect law spell) functions as that of a cleric whose level is equal to the Hellknight's character level.   Detect Chaos (Sp): This ability functions like the paladin's detect evil class feature, save that it grants the use of detect chaos instead.   Order: A character must choose one Hellknight order to join at 1st level (see page 89 for a list of orders). The choice of order determines which disciplines the character later gains access to.   Smite Chaos (Su): This ability functions as the paladin's smite evil class feature but against chaotic-aligned creatures. This ability is twice as effective against outsiders with the chaotic subtype, chaotic-aligned aberrations, and fey.   Discern Lies (Sp): At 2nd level, a Hellknight can use discern lies as a spell-like ability a number of times per day equal to 3 + his Charisma modifier with a caster level equal to his character level.   Hellknight Armor (Ex): At 2nd level, a Hellknight earns the right to wear Hellknight plate (see page 97), which does not reduce his speed. While wearing this armor, the Hellknight reduces its armor check penalty by 1 and increases the maximum Dexterity bonus allowed by 1. At 5th level, these adjustments increase to 2. At 8th level, these adjustments increase to 3.   Disciplines: At 3rd level, a Hellknight gains access to his first discipline, choosing one associated with his specific order. At 6th level, the Hellknight gains a second discipline, choosing from any listed as being available to "any order." At 9th level, the Hellknight gains his third discipline, choosing this one from any of the disciplines listed below, even those from another order, with the exception of pentamic faith. When applicable, the save DC to resist a discipline's effect is equal to 10 + the Hellknight's level + his Charisma modifier. The Hellknight can use any one discipline a number of times per day equal to the total number of disciplines he has access to, so at 3rd level he can use his discipline once per day. At 6th level, he can use both disciplines twice per day each. At 9th level, he can use all three of his disciplines three times per day.   See here for a full list of Hellknight Disciplines.   
71  Very simple to make although with a long preparation time. The soup, if cooked as directed will result in a very tasty soup. It's worth the effort, a real homemade recipe.  I'm not sure if I did something wrong, but my rice absorbed all the juices and this just became mush. :/   Asign 0 1  Very simple to make although with a long preparation time. The soup, if cooked as directed will result in a very tasty soup. It's worth the effort, a real homemade recipe. Read more   Joey & Jenessa 0 1  It's a keeper! Very good as is; but we're tinkerers and we: -added small chunks of 1 avacado -1 cup of cilantro -drained the onion mix of excess oil before adding the other items (the soup has ... Read more   yd4eva 88 10  I just finished making this soup & i must say it is amazing. My taste buds were dancin'! It has a bit of a spice to it & im really not the spicy type but in this case it was perfect. My family h... Read more   vrgirl 16 11  This is super popular with everyone I've made it for. However, I do make my own chicken stock, and I shred the chicken instead of using pieces - also, I make the rice separately - because if you... Read more   K. Spinks 55 5  This is my favorite soup when I go to Peruvian restaurants and I was hoping the recipe came out well. It was great! I doubled the cilantro because whenever I've had aguadito before, it's been ... Read more   Ashley 161 43  Delicious soup! Very authentic recipe. I just added some celery in with the onion to cook, and little more garlic. I feel like I'm in Peru eating this soup. Tastes and looks just like it's suppo... Read more   Norma Zumaeta 32 5  Hangover, colds, flu, getting it back together recipe!! it tasted like home! however I substituted the "minced serrano chile" mainly because as a Peruvian I had no idea what it was, with aji am... Read more   Karen Gale 55 1  I made this last night and we really enjoyed it. I skipped the rice to save on a few carbs. My adult children even took home the left overs. I will definitely make this again. I cut the chic... Read more
Danish women have become the latest to report being groped by migrant men who 'simply can't handle' the sight of a girl.  Officials in one town say they have experienced a harassment problem since a camp hosting 365 asylum seekers opened in November.  Victims have also been targeted in nightclubs in two other towns where one local says Syrian migrants 'go nuts' if they see a woman.  The reports come days after similar warnings were issued across Europe about the rising number of sex attacks by gangs of migrants.  Scroll down for video  Danish women have become the latest to report being groped by migrant men. It comes after a wave of similar reports spread across Europe including from hundreds of women in the German town of Cologne (above)  Security authorities are growing increasingly concerned by the rising number of sex attacks by gangs of migrants which appear to be spreading across Europe  Germany, in particular, is grappling with a massive wave of attacks on women, including hundreds of victims in Cologne during the New Year celebrations.  In Denmark, Lars Sloth, the director of the children and families unit in the town of Thisted, told news agency Ritzau that several young women have felt 'unsafe on the streets' after being accosted.  Women have also encountered problems on dance floors in the southern Jutland towns of Sonderborg and Haderslev, it was reported by The Local.  Glenn Hollender, from the Sonderborg club, Den Flyvende Hollænder, told TV Syd: 'A large number of the male guests who come from the local asylum centre have a very hard time respecting the opposite sex.  'In my eyes, it is harassment when one or more men continue to touch a young woman after she has said 'stop'.'  Swiss artist Milo Moire holds a sign 'Respect us! We are no fair game even when we are naked!!!' as she protests naked in front of Cologne cathedral  Horrfiying: One victim, an 18-year-old named Michelle (pictured, in the square outside the main train station where she was attacked) described being surrounded by a group of 30 'angry' men who groped her and her friends then stole their belongings as they fled. Police officers said women had to run a 'gauntlet' to escape  DENMARK EXTENDS BORDER CONTROLS FOR MIGRANTS Denmark has opted to extended its temporary border controls by 20 days to February 3 to curb the influx of migrants. The government had initially implemented a 10-day control after a similar move by Sweden. 'The assessment is that there is still a risk that a large number of illegal immigrants accumulate in Denmark,' the Integration Ministry said.  Rafi Ibrahim, a Syrian who has lived in Denmark for years, said new migrants don't know how to behave around women in Western society.  He said: 'If they see a girl, they go nuts. They simply can't handle it.  'In Syria and many other countries, it is not normal for a strange woman to smile at you.  'Those girls who are harassed aren't necessarily scantily-dressed or drunk. Sometimes it is enough just to be a girl.'  It comes after more than two hundred women reported being sexually assaulted by groups of mostly Arab or North African men in Cologne during the New Year celebrations.  Police say 553 criminal complaints have been filed, with about 45 per cent involving allegations of sexual offences, and most of the suspects identified so far are foreign nationals.  The attack have been seized by right-wing groups as evidence that chancellor Angela Merkel's open door policy is a failure.  Finland and Sweden later issued warnings to women to be wary of the threat of sex attacks following fresh reports of sexual assaults in the last week,  Viennese police have also advised women not to go outside alone in Vienna.  Further cases have also emerged of similar attacks being reported in Switzerland, where six women claimed to have been victims in Zurich on New Year's Eve.
Last week Georgetown failed to close on yet another tremendous opportunity to tally a signature win, this time on its home floor against #10 Kansas. Despite not having watched a single college basketball game all year, my girlfriend made an astute observation in the closing minutes: "He shoots too much." The "he" she was referring to was D'Vauntes Smith-Rivera, the Hoyas' leading scorer at 13.3 PPG and the coaches' nomination for preseason Big East Player of the Year. It confirmed something many Hoyas' fans have been wondering as well: How is this the same player who finished sixth in scoring in the Big East last season? Against Kansas, in the midst a miserable 3-of-15 shooting performance, it became apparent that Smith-Rivera's overwhelming desire to shoot took the team's offense out of rhythm.  Thus far, the Hoyas have played four teams in KenPom's top 30 and have emerged with a relatively unimpressive 1-3 result. Those losses — to Wisconsin, Butler and Kansas — were by a cumulative of 14 points. So what gives? For one, turnovers. The Hoyas have coughed it up on 21.8 percent of their possessions, resulting in missed key scoring opportunities and failed late game offensive execution. However, the problem seems to extend beyond that. A big theme for Georgetown this season has involved Smith-Rivera shooting more and making less. The junior has yielded some of the scoring responsibilities to Joshua Smith, but he still accounts for 26.2 percent of the team's shots and has converted at a rate lower than both his freshman and sophomore year campaigns. Even more troubling is his three-point shooting. Without backcourt mate Markel Starks to remove some of the defensive focus on the perimeter, it appears that defenses have honed in on him, or he has felt an increased pressure to pick up the offensive slack, resulting in poorer shot selection. Regardless of the reason, Smith-Rivera is shooting just 27.5 percent from deep, in stark contrast to his 39.3 percent mark last season.  The other issue has been inconsistent play on the wings, both offensively and defensively. Given the arrival of four new faces to fill out the two, three and four spots, the onus falls on the seniors, specifically Jabril Trawick. Trawick has never been a big-time scorer, but his lack of offensive aggression this season has been appalling. At the end of his junior campaign, he tallied double figures in nine of his last 12 outings through a combination of three-point shooting and penetration. Yet this season, he has crossed that threshold only three times and frankly looks hesitant with the ball.  But in spite of scoring inconsistencies, defensive lapses on the perimeter and an abundance of turnovers, there still are reasons for optimism. For example, the Hoyas' freshmen have shown unusual signs of maturity. Freshman L.J. Peak is averaging 9.3 PPG and is developing quickly, as evidenced by his 18-point outburst against Kansas. Additionally, Paul White and Isaac Copeland, a pair of heralded recruits, have helped to steady the Hoyas' offensive output when Smith-Rivera has gone cold. Above all, the contributions of Smith on the interior have been monumental. No defender, no matter how tall or athletic, has found a way to stop him once he catches the ball on the blocks. Averaging 12.8 points and 6.6 rebounds per game, the 6'10" senior has formed a formidable defensive front line alongside Mikael Hopkins, a 6'9″ shot-blocking, rebounding extraordinaire.  For Georgetown, the good has been overshadowed by the bad, but the bad appears to be both temporary and fixable. We know Smith-Rivera can shoot and score in bunches; we know Trawick can play more aggressively; and we know that freshmen generally get better with time. As it stands, all signs point to improvement as the season progresses, but the overwhelming question is when? The answer to that will decide the Hoyas' fate. For now, Hoya fans should remain optimistic and trust that John Thompson III will have his squad, the most talented he has had in several years, in form by March.  Justin Kundrat ( 142 Posts Villanova grad, patiently waiting another 10 years for season tickets. Follow Justin on twitter @JustinKundrat or email him at justin.kundrat@gmail.com  Share this story
NEW DELHI: Here's something ayurveda gurus like Charak and Susrutha may not have imagined. Modern ayurvedacharayas, homoeopaths and other Ayush doctors may soon be allowed to conduct non-invasive abortions. The health ministry has worked out changes to the Medical Termination of Pregnancy (MTP) Amendment Bill. The revised bill proposes to allow Ayush doctors to conduct non-invasive procedures on women seeking to terminate pregnancy. The draft bill will soon be sent to the Cabinet.  "We have made revisions to the earlier draft and proposed that Ayush doctors who are registered healthcare specialists be allowed to carry out non-invasive procedure, which would mean prescribing medicines etc," a senior health ministry official told TOI.  Another key amendment seeks to increase the period for abortion to 24 weeks from the present 20 weeks. The government's proposal, originally formulated taking a cue from a study conducted by Population Council, is aimed at increasing access to safe abortion by expanding the number of healthcare providers. Estimates show around 7 million abortions are conducted in India every year and over 50% of them are said to be illegal.  Initially, the government had decided to allow midwives and Ayush doctors to do even invasive procedures for abortion, but dropped it following mounting objections from allopathic practitioners, particularly Indian Medical Association (IMA) and Federation of Obstetric and Gynaecological Societies of India (FOGSI). IMA, a pan India voluntary organization with a membership of 2.5 lakh allopathic practitioners, said even the latest move can put patients at risk as well as allow unethical practices and sex selective abortions.  TOI  Don't Miss 40.7 K SHARES 16.5 K SHARES 9.9 K SHARES 9.4 K SHARES 3.9 K SHARES  "MTP is a procedure meant to be conducted by an allopathic doctor only. It is not possible to allow restricted practice. How will the government monitor whether a person is conducting abortion through medicine or doing invasive procedures," says IMA secretary general Dr KK Aggarwal. According to Dr Aggarwal, abortions by a non-MBBS doctor can lead to critical medical conditions arising out of excessive bleeding or incomplete abortions, which can be difficult to handle.  Ministry officials say FOGSI members were part of the consultations and initially supported the amendments. However, FOGSI has maintained that it changed its position after a thorough discussion. "Expanding the number and type of providers able to legally perform abortion services, including manual vacuum aspiration (MVA) and medical abortion (MA), could greatly expand women's access to safe abortion and save many lives each year," Population Council said in a note on the issue.  The World Health Organisation (WHO) also seems to endorse the government's proposal. A technical and policy guidance for health systems by WHO released in 2012 states, "Abortion care can be safely provided by any properly trained health-care provider, including mid-level providers....(e.g. midwives, nurse practitioners, clinical officers, physician assistants, family welfare visitors, and others) who are trained to provide basic clinical procedures related to reproductive health..."  TOI  Traditionally, mid-wives have played a key role in catering to urgent medical needs, especially attending to pregnant women for child delivery or even for abortion, in rural areas and villages that lacked medical facilities. Though with time government health centres and private players reached many such villages, mid-wives continue to exist and attend to many emergencies even today. The government's proposal to involve Ayush doctors has also found support from the women and child development ministry, National Commission for Women and other women's groups.  (Originally published in The Times of India)
After starting the past two games for the New England Patriots, backup quarterback Jimmy Garoppolo has been creating a lot of headlines for himself around the league.  Within the two games that he has played, rumors have been tossed around that the team should trade Garoppolo when Tom Brady comes back, due to his high trade value and his performance. The question on a lot of people's mind is whether the team should trade or keep Garoppolo.  In two games this season, Garoppolo has thrown for 498 yards, 4 touchdowns and 1 interception, with a passer rating of 117.2. The reason for Garoppolo starting the first two games is due to Brady being suspended for the first four games of the season for what is known as "deflategate".  In his first start of the season vs the Arizona Cardinals, he looked great with his throws, driving the team down the field, helping them win 23-21. He threw for 264 yards, 1 touchdown and 0 interceptions, with a passer rating of 73.0. He did showcase some flaws as well, but that is expected for your first start.  In his second start of the season vs the Miami Dolphins, Garoppolo looked phenomenal. He was making great passes down the field, looked poised in the pocket, and showcased his arm strength. Before getting injured near the end of the first half, he threw for 234 yards, 3 touchdowns and 0 interceptions, with a passer rating of 98.9.  Even though we only saw a sample size of Garoppolo in only two starts in the league, he looked pretty good in those two starts.  He still needs to work on some stuff, but at the end of the day, Garoppolo has a bright future as a starting quarterback. He is a duel threat, and if he can not find a receiver open, he can run with the ball for a good chunk of yards.  Despite the amazing numbers that Brady produces season after season, he does not have a lot of years left in the league, with him being 39-years old.  The team has to think of a backup plan for the future, and that is where Garoppolo comes in, as he showcased his potential in his first two starts in the league.  Teams like the Cleveland Browns, Chicago Bears, and the San Fransisco 49ers will be interested in Garoppolo, due to the fact that these teams will be looking for a young quarterback that can lead the franchise and be the face of it.  Out of all of these teams, the most interested team will most likely be Cleveland or Chicago, if they can get rid of Jay Cutler's contract somehow in the future.  The value will him for be draft picks, most likely first and second round picks. For a team like New England that has a quarterback that is in his prime and a quarterback that has a bright future as a starter, getting a high 1st round pick for the prospect would be fair value.  Garoppolo would be a great choice to replace Brady when he hangs up his cleats, as he is still young (24) that he has a great career ahead of him.  Out of himself and Jacoby Brissett, Garoppolo is the better quarterback, considering he can throw the ball more accurately, is better in the pocket, and he has a better arm as well. Both quarterbacks have good upside, but Garoppolo's upside is much better than Brissett.  At the end of the day, the team should listen to offers for him, but the team should not trade him, since he has got so much potential and can be a great quarterback to lead the team after Brady retires.  Photo Credit Maddie Meyer/Getty Images  Share this: Twitter  Facebook  Google
I've Written A Book But? I've written a book but it isn't yet published. I want to mention this in my CV. how can I write it?  Insist? Hi, "He insisted that she should stay on the line before he tells her everything." "He insisted that she stay on the line...  Even If + Would Not Have? Every gate was closed and barred and heavily guarded, though; no one was allowed to enter or depart the castle without...  Date Of Birth? ankit kumar  What Is The Difference? I See No Difference... He did not find cosby to be a risk. He did not find cosby would be risk. ...
Part of the 20-building Brewster-Douglass housing project site in Detroit, seen in March 2011, two years after the last residents moved out. (Paul Sancya/AP)  Coded language, by definition, conveys much saying very little. And so those words allegedly uttered in McKinney, Tex., before a confrontation between police and black teens — "Go back to your Section 8 home" — evoked a particular and vivid set of assumptions.  The words were offensive because of what we think they meant in the charged context earlier this month in which police were called on black teens using a private community pool in a mostly white neighborhood. The teen who recounted what happened described those words as a "racial slur." We can imagine they meant that these children came from poor families, that the government helped their mothers pay the rent, that their quality as people was reflected in the quality of their housing.  In a broad sense, this is an American tradition: conflating where people live with who they are. "We've been doing that as a society for a really, really long time," says Lawrence Vale, an MIT professor who has written extensively about public housing. "And it's been racialized for a lot of that history."  This is the history of how public housing in the United States — originally conceived as enviable housing for working whites — has become a prism through which some Americans see poor blacks. It's a history that explains how some of the most visible public projects in big cities became, over decades, almost exclusively black, how the residents living there came to be among the country's most deeply impoverished. Today, households receiving government housing assistance — from traditional public housing to the private-market vouchers it inspired — live on average incomes of less than $13,000 a year.  This is a history that also helps explain how the outdated name of a bureaucratic-sounding federal program, Section 8, became a racially coded put-down.   A mother and child, residents of the Cabrini-Green public housing project in Chicago, play in a playground adjoining the project in 1981. (Charles Knoblock/AP)  The main public housing program in the United States was originally created in 1937 as the one of the last major acts of the New Deal. The goal of that act, though, was not to house the poor, but to revive the housing industry. In the middle of the Depression, housing construction had collapsed, and many communities faced a severe housing shortage.  In response, the federal government paid for the construction of hundreds of thousands of new housing units, many built on land where slums had been razed. The homes were considered modern and pristine, a dramatic step toward better housing from overcrowded urban tenements. Residents paid rent that was supposed to cover the costs of upkeep.  Most of these early projects were built for whites, and whites of a particular kind: the "barely poor," as Vale puts it — the upwardly mobile working class, with fathers working in factory jobs. Housing agencies required tenant families to have stable work and married parents. Children out of wedlock were rejected. Housing authority managers visited prospective tenants, often unannounced, to check on the cleanliness of their homes and their housekeeping habits.  "The idea — although people didn't tend to voice it explicitly — was that you could be too poor for public housing," Vale says. In many cities, the truly poor remained in the tenements.  Where comparable public housing was developed for blacks, it was strictly segregated. St. Louis's Pruitt-Igoe project, completed in 1954, housed whites in the Igoe Apartments and blacks in the Pruitt Homes. More often, though, housing for blacks and whites was located in separate parts of a city.  By the 1960s, the tenants living in public housing began to grow more deeply poor and, particularly in big cities, much less white, in large part thanks to another set of active housing policies pushed next by the federal government.  In cities like Chicago and Detroit, public housing "became a black program," says the Economic Policy Institute's Richard Rothstein, "because the Federal Housing Administration created a different program for whites, which was a single-family suburban program."  From barely poor to deep poverty  The Federal Housing Administration financed the construction of new single-family homes in suburban developments (and government money plotted and paved the roads to get there). The FHA and the Veteran's Administration also guaranteed cheap mortgages for the families who moved there, making this new kind of owner-occupied housing often just as affordable as rents had been in public housing projects in the city. Like many of those original projects, though, the new homes were explicitly unavailable to blacks. The FHA required developers to use restrictive covenants barring blacks, and it denied black families the mortgages that allowed working-class whites to leave public housing.  As the white "barely poor" moved out
Get daily updates directly to your inbox Subscribe Thank you for subscribing See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email  The elderly victim of a burglary in Cardiff has written an open letter to the person responsible as part of an appeal for information.  Iris Mayer returned home from a hospital appointment to her house in Fairwater on Friday, January 17, to discover that her front door was locked from the inside.  Once inside, the 79-year-old discovered that her home had been ransacked by burglars who stole money, jewellery, a purse and a phone.  Even worse, the burglary happened as the pensioner prepared for the funeral of her grandson the following day.  Dorothy Mayer reads an open letter to the burglars who ransacked her home   Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now  A police investigation is continuing and detectives believe the culprit is local to the area.  Now in an appeal for information, Mrs Mayer has released a photograph of the mess and written a letter to the person responsible in the hope it will encourage them or those with information to come forward.  In it the angry pensioner said: "Pity you didn't wait one more day, you would have had the house to yourself. And maybe left it as you found it, clean and tidy, not like a tip.  "You obviously went with your muddy boots straight to the bedrooms where you left muddy prints all over my cream carpets, even the goods you threw on the floor, you walked over without any concern.  "I do hope you made a mistake and are caught. If it is stealing to pay for drugs you need help before it kills you, I would like to suggest you are made to go cold turkey and clean up your way of life."  Officers believe the person or person's responsible gained access to the back of the house via a footpath which runs between Keystone road and Tangmere Drive.  Once inside the property they changed a bedroom light bulb which detectives believe was to enable them to see better.  It is believed the house was burgled some time between 1pm and 3.30pm.  Detective Constable Geraint Higgins said: "This elderly victim has been left devastated by what has happened.  "Whoever was responsible mercilessly ransacked her home to look for something to steal. The victim has shown tremendous bravery and we are appealing for information that will help us make an arrest.  "People may have been offered a mobile phone, or they may have seen or found a purse discarded in the area.  "We'd like to speak to anybody who may have noticed somebody acting suspiciously, especially along the footpath from midday until around 3.30pm on Friday afternoon."  Anyone with information can contact South Wales Police on 101 or call Crimestoppers anonymously on 0800 555 111 quoting occurrence number 62140016132.
Firstly clean out the tank of fuel, remembering to dispose of waste fuel safely!!  Don,t worry about washing it out just shake out any loose bits if you can.  we will doing the tank in two parts, with the tank in its normal position and then upside down. both are done exactly the same way.  This instructable will show the upside down part, but right side up is the same method.  Do this in a well ventilated area, prefably outside as the process of electrolysis will produce hydrogen gas!!  Make sure the tank is stable and block any pipes coming out to prevent leaking.   Make sure the cap seals properly, if in dought use some plastic to help it   Remove the fuel level sender
MUSHCode for Moe's Mushkode Manual - Writing an IC time system. Select Content  ~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*  |\ /| |\ /| |\ /|  | \ / | | \ / | | \ / |  | \/ |oe's | \/ |ushkode | \/ |anual  ~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*~*   LESSON 6 - WHAT TIME IS IT?   In our previous five lessons, we have spent a lot of time  establishing some basic guidelines for how to code. How to approach the  construction of a command, how to store data, how to retrieve it, and how  to cope with a set of commands that all work on the same data have been  covered in this series of tutorials. What I'm going to do now is give you  one method for how to make an IC time system.  Previously, we'd done a multiple-item vendor, which is for many  coders the jumping-off point as far as skills and projects go. Once you  have something that works locally, the next logical step is to make things  that work globally. While I don't think I'll get to every standard code  system that is used in these lessons, I want to show you some of the  things I can do and hope that from there, you'll know enough to go out on  your own and do your own stuff.  This lesson is going to be written a trifle differently than the  previous five, because if you have read them, worked through the examples,  and understood what I was talking about(no small task, particularly the  last part.), you are going to have a more than functional lexicon of code  knowledge. This lets me skim over a few of the general elements of the  code logic I will present, and focus on some of the more precise details.  What this means for you is that if you either a) don't have a  solid grasp of what mushcode is, b) found this link in a websearch, or c)  you're currently quite chemically inconvenienced...this is going to make  little to no sense to you. I suggest that you read at least lessons one,  two, and three, as those lay out the fundamental principles by which I  code, and give you a sense of how I build commands and u-functions.  The topic of this lesson is going to be the construction of an IC  time system, that works on a faster-than-RL time scale. The one I am going  to show you how to build has been used, successfully, on ten mushes so  far, and easily accomodates a 2:1, 3:1, or higher(yipes) timescale. This  particular system uses the vector math functions present in all of the  major codebases, and is both easy to understand, and very easy to  configure.   VECTOR? THAT'S A CEREAL!!   What follows is going to be a very brief, very informal, and quite  likely imprecise definition of what vector math is. The purpose of this  tutorial is to teach you to code, not to teach you higher math. The vector  functions are used in this system because they facilitate the result. The  end justifies the means.  In science, specifically physics, there are two main kinds of  physical quantities: Scalars and Vectors. A scalar is a quantity that is  completely specified by a number with appropriate units. 10 degrees  Fahrenheit. 4 inches. 100ml. Those are all scalar values. They completely  specify the measurement. No direction is required.  Vectors are not just a current state. They are the displacement of  a thing, defined as a change in position. A plane, flying at 500mph, is  going in a direction. Because of its state, its position is changing from  one place to another. The cumulative description of both its speed and  direction is a vector.  How does this apply to time? Well, what we are going to do in our  IC time system is establish a starting point, from which all IC time is  calculated
Licensed trade operators in and around Glasgow have united to condemn the decision to stage a Celtic-Rangers ("Old Firm") match on Hogmanay, fearing it will make an already difficult night unmanageable and dangerous.  Among the strongest comments have come from Paul Waterson, chief executive of the Scottish Licensed Trade Association, who wants the match moved to January 2 or 3 and away from the one night of the year when police are already at full stretch and the streets awash with revellers tanked up on supermarket drink carry-outs.  Mr Waterson has also questioned why a recent attempt to stage a Munich-style Oktoberfest event in the city centre was knocked back – on the grounds that it would provoke drunken disorder – while an "Old Firm" clash has been sanctioned to go ahead.  He said: "Does no-one remember Police Scotland's campaign last year during the festive season to reduce the number of domestic incidents – a time when violence is at its highest?"  The SLTA has described the Hogmanay decision in forthright terms as "senseless" and "outrageous".  Police were reportedly forced to despatch riot vans to control the chaos said to have erupted after an earlier attempt to stage the Oktoberfest event, which had no sectarian football connotation.  A recent match between Rangers and Celtic sparked ugly scenes across Glasgow and into adjoining areas, with drunk supporters screaming sectarian abuse at each other throughout the afternoon.  While attention is fixed on Glasgow, Hogmanay flashpoints could also surface in locations as different as Dumbarton and Kirkintilloch – much of west central Scotland could be involved.  The poisonous historic sectarian rivalry between Rangers and Celtic is feared likely to take on an added edge to an already problematic night.  Licensed trade expert Susan Young, editor of leading trade journal The Dram, said: "I haven't spoken to a single person who thinks this is a good idea. Hogmanay is supposed to be for families – that's the tradition – and instead we'll have something which has nothing to do with real celebration."  She says that on a practical note it's also "the one night in the year" when many men help out, as in organising family parties – and predicts many football supporting spouses will be otherwise occupied.  She also considers the licensed trade will struggle to contain the backlash from the game, whatever its result, and that even pubs closing early will face an extra security hazard as they strive to maintain their legal obligation by turning away aggressive drunks.  A main worry is that many supporters will be both belligerent and drunk before trying to gain entry to licensed premises – dissuading normal Hogmanay revellers from having a drink "before the bells" .  That in turn could give bars the worst of both worlds, with few regular customers braving late night streets for it to be worthwhile opening, and a deluge of drunk supporters to keep at bay.  The propensity for domestic violence is feared set to rise dramatically.  Another worry is that as embattled police try to contain "Old Firm" -related drunkenness, abuse and sometimes outright thuggery the chaos could leave the way open for opportunist criminals.  Meanwhile Hogmanay, often said to have lost its traditional family and community spirit, could send out a message about Scotland wildly at odds with its supposed theme of inclusion, generosity and hope.  A night when "auld acquaintance" is supposedly celebrated in a roseate familial and communitarian glow of Burnsian bonhomie could instead feature in January 1 news broadcasts as a squalid sectarian bacchanale which puts families at risk, mocking the "Glasgow Loves Hogmanay" theme which the city council hoped would move celebrations away from the usual Glasgow-style mass drunkenness.  The police have said that planning for the unprecedented December 31 "Old Firm" fixture is already underway, and that policing it will involve "a multi-agency partnership approach".  Assistant Chief Constable Bernard Higgins has defended the remarkable decision by maintaining that the time and date were decided after discussions involving police, football authorities and broadcasters.  Chief Constable Phil Gormley said: "There is no ideal time to have the game, but if you put it on New Year's Eve at 12.30pm you reduce the risk of over-consumption of alcohol.  "You've also got a full transport infrastructure on so that people can get to and from the match.  "There's a compelling logic around it."
Not by default, but Sasory made this update. See MODs post. There you will find all mods available for this ROM.This because of the touch panel drivers.Use TWRP 2.5.0.0 or 2.6.0.0You probably use Philz recovery. Go to Philz settings. There there you will find an option to Erase All Data/Prepare for flashing ROM (not sure of the exact syntax) -> Thanks stathis95194That's right. First boot can takes up to 10 minutes.Yes, Superuser by @ Koush is present in ROM.Tap few times on Build Version and Dev options should appear.Not yet.You have to wait for the developers to make new ones.For 98,9% of the people WiFi works, some people experience problems (that WiFi is disconnecting). Don't know a reasonDevice can run Zoe images, but can't record them...Go to settings, Personalize, Home screen style and choose BlinkFeedYes, see http://forum.xda-developers.com/show...&postcount=223 It's not in the battery but you can enable percentage in Settings > Power > Show battery level.It's enabled by default.Go to Settings > Screen and Gestures > Buttons.By default, Aroma installer will install all apps. Ticking an app in Aroma installer DISABLES the app from installing, so you won't have the apps you ticked. Re-flash the ROM to get the other apps.This is removed HTC.A user reported this problem when selected German Keyboard when flashing. Maybe you have the same issue. Try without it if this is the case. It might work. (Shutdown your phone, re-flash the boot.img, re-wipe everything (NOT SD-CARD!) and re-flash the ROM. That should fix it.)Flash this zip by recovery. Reboot to Sense. Start this version, there will be a message that there are other Superuser applications and i fit must try to deinstall that ones. Choose YesFor those with root problems, check if Superuser is not disabled. It is disabled in some cases.Yes, however, hboot 1.3x or higher is required.Try PhilzTouch RecoveryHold the power button down till bottom keys starts to flash and phone turns off. Once phone is turned off press vol- first then press power do not let go vol- till you get into hboot.HTC removed such feature.It was removed by HTC already since Sense 4.In the backup menu, tap on your google account, that lets you change it to HTCYES, It is recommended to flash the new boot.imgYou have to install it manually out Download folder. This CWM fault that it can't install zip automatically.
Where:  Crowne Plaza, Hickory NC   ReAsonCon: bringing awareness and unity to the secular community!  Current Speaker Lineup:  Special Musical Guest…  Master of Ceremonies…  SPECIAL EVENT – Saturday April 22nd, 2017 – General Admission – Podcast Record with 'God Awful Movies' – *LIVE*  *** Don't forget to Tweet and/or Facebook all your Friends using #ReAsonCon3 ***  We had such a great time at ReAsonCon ONE and ReAsonCon 2015… why not do it again?
How Google's executive chairman is gaining a reputation as a playboy, thanks to a deleted Instagram account, a £9.4 million Manhattan penthouse and his very own superyacht.  Rex Features  What happens when you Google the man who runs Google? Schmidt happens, that's what.  Advertisement  As in: Eric Schmidt, the internet company's 58-year-old executive chairman - a man whose circular glasses, boiled-ham complexion and shapeless black suits make him look more like a mid-level Scandinavian architect from 1986 than one of the richest men on earth.  Schmidt is everywhere online.  Read next What it would be like to live in the cheapest house in London What it would be like to live in the cheapest house in London This "Sad Cabin" is all yours for £100k.  Type his name into the site over which he presides, and the bots and spiders that toil beneath the surface of the web will present you with thousands of blandly identical images of his corporate head shot, along with some extraordinary details about the Washington-born, married-with-kids programmer who spends much of his time circling the globe in his Gulfstream V jet.  Details like his £5bn of personal stockholdings, for example. Or his recent visits to Number Ten Downing Street - where he has a place on David Cameron's business advisory group - and to one of Kim Il-sung University's computer labs in North Korea. Not to mention the Bermudan tax-avoidance scheme he helps operate as a member of Google's board of directors - the company paid just £11.2m to HM Revenues &  Advertisement  Customs last year on an estimated £3bn of UK revenues - and his now-infamous statement that: "If you have something that you don't want anyone to know, maybe you shouldn't be doing it in the first place."  Of all the above, of course, it has been the Google chairman's radical view of privacy rights - or our lack thereof - that has transformed him from anonymous mega-nerd to a kind of Big Brother figure for the post-iPhone age.  Schmidt has boasted that "we can more or less know what you're thinking about", that "we can suggest what you should do next", and opined that everyone in the future should change their name on reaching adulthood to escape the undeletable indiscretions of their teenage years. The last was a joke, he has since claimed, although it's hard to blame anyone for taking him seriously. This is, after all, the man who brought us Street View maps, video-enabled glasses and software that can use our profile pictures in adverts targeted at our friends.  Read next Why I'm into the female assassin in Killing Eve Why I'm into the female assassin in Killing Eve She's irreverent, unapologetic, selfish and curious, with a fantastic sense of humour  If you have something that you don't want anyone to know,maybe you shouldn't be doing it in the first place Eric Schmidt  Advertisement  But since the mid-Noughties, in an irony so large it can probably be viewed from one of the asteroids that Google soon hopes to mine (on which more later), Schmidt has found himself a victim of the same kind of privacy-obliterating tools that his company has spent 15 years developing.  There has been speculation about his sound-proofed penthouse apartment in the heart of Manhattan.  Racy images of bikini-topped young females from a now-closed Instagram account. And, bizarrely, an account of the Google chairman's 2007 road trip to the Burning Man festival in Nevada, during which he had a screaming argument with Apple founder Steve Jobs on a desert payphone, and was later photographed amid the acid heads and techno freaks dressed in a red neckerchief and a pair of Breaking Bad-style lab goggles.  All of which couldn't have come at a more sensitive time for Google, given that its share price has just blown past the psychologically important $1,000 mark, in large part due to the salivation of investors over the very same services that have so enraged Schmidt's critics.  Read next Too young for festivals: how Generation Z is ruining the festival season for millennials Too young for festivals: how Generation Z is ruining the festival season for millennials Teens and preteens are about to ruin summer... again. For one card-carrying millennial fogey, these tyrannical children are turning festival season into Lord Of The Flies.  At the time of writing, Schmidt was maintaining an uncomfortable silence on the increasing clamour over his not-so-private life. But his wife of 33 years, Wendy (with whom he has two grown-up daughters, Allison and Sophie), speaking to a New York Times reporter from her home on the billionaires' island of Nantucket,
I spotted this pretty little colorboard on 100 Layer Cake  and I just had to share! I love the way the colors go together and I think it helps that I just so happen to love art, donuts and shoes... Brilliant!
There is no significance, and it doesn't seem to be a running gag either.  As per this twitter conversation between a fan and Guardians of the Galaxy director James Gunn;  "Hey @JamesGunn was Star Lord's 12% plan from GoTG a deliberate reference to Stark's 12% credit from Avengers or was it a happy coincidence?" "No. The number 12 is often used in writing/comedy because it's the highest one syllable number."  So there is no significance to the number 12 in these films. It just so happens that the way it sounds makes it convenient to use in a joke, and both directors have.
cryptoanarchist   Offline   Activity: 1120  Merit: 1000   LegendaryActivity: 1120Merit: 1000 Peter Vessenes: Take a step back and F*** YOUR OWN FACE!!! June 02, 2013, 09:16:28 PM #1   Quote But Peter Vessenes, chairman and executive director of the Bitcoin Foundation, was unfazed by the Liberty Reserve crackdown.   "The U.S. put out guidance recently through the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, and we've been following up on that guidance and crushing bad actors," he said in an interview with CNBC Asia. "We're seeing a bit of a sweep right now," he said.  To Peter:   Really fu**face? Who exactly have you been "crushing"?   How exactly are you "regulating" bitcoin when I can still buy and sell them without using any ID? When I can still buy and sell whatever I want with them over Silk Road?   To everyone else:   You have to ask, "What is CNBC and Peter trying to accomplish with this bit of propaganda?"   To someone who is low-tech and new to bitcoin, this would easily convince them that Peter is the head of bitcoin, and that he is making it a regulated currency.   Now you may realize that Peter is just a self appointed nitwit of a rather meaningless organization, but the average dumb american does not. The banks' strategy is to create a regulated sphere of bitcoin usage, and use their media to spin it like they are cracking down on everyone else. Sort of like shutting down Napster, and creating itunes. Thing is, that hasn't stopped anyone from downloading free music, and I doubt Peter and his band of assclowns will do any better with bitcoin - even with all the help in the world from the mainstream zionist media.   http://youtu.be/KbjQ1PeAbeg From http://www.cnbc.com/id/100774151 To Peter:Really fu**face? Who exactly have you been "crushing"?How exactly are you "regulating" bitcoin when I can still buy and sell them without using any ID? When I can still buy and sell whatever I want with them over Silk Road?To everyone else:You have to ask, "What is CNBC and Peter trying to accomplish with this bit of propaganda?"To someone who is low-tech and new to bitcoin, this would easily convince them that Peter is the head of bitcoin, and that he is making it a regulated currency.Now you may realize that Peter is just a self appointed nitwit of a rather meaningless organization, but the average dumb american does not. The banks' strategy is to create a regulated sphere of bitcoin usage, and use their media to spin it like they are cracking down on everyone else. Sort of like shutting down Napster, and creating itunes. Thing is, that hasn't stopped anyone from downloading free music, and I doubt Peter and his band of assclowns will do any better with bitcoin - even with all the help in the world from the mainstream zionist media. I'm grumpy!!  franky1   Online   Activity: 2184  Merit: 1185   LegendaryActivity: 2184Merit: 1185 Re: Peter Vessenes: Take a step back and F*** YOUR OWN FACE!!! June 02, 2013, 10:01:52 PM #8 Quote from: cryptoanarchist on June 02, 2013, 09:35:06 PM Quote from: Melbustus on June 02, 2013, 09:24:38 PM What exactly are you trying to accomplish by pointing this out?   I gather that you don't like Vessenes, but beyond that: Point == Missed.   I wasn't making a point to you. This post is directed at Peter. I'd like him to explain who exactly he is "crushing".  I wasn't making a point to you. This post is directed at Peter. I'd like him to explain who exactly he is "crushing".  crushing fiat transmitters that claim to be legit and trustworthy with our FIAT. then later found out they are not legit fiat transmitters.   its all about fiat..... meanwhile bitcoin remains unaffected.   if you think that bitcoin has been affected then you do not know bitcoin. please learn the non-exchange methods of obtaining bitcoin. the true, original way it was supposed to be dispursed.  hint peer-to-peer (localbitcoin / irc-otc) style crushing fiat transmitters that claim to be legit and trustworthy with our FIAT. then later found out they are not legit fiat transmitters.its all about fiat..... meanwhile bitcoin remains unaffected.if you think that bitcoin has been affected then you do not know bitcoin. please learn the non-exchange methods of obtaining bitcoin
Welcome to the home page for New Jersey's third largest and fastest growing political party, the New Jersey Libertarian Party! With over 9,600 registered Libertarians, our members are often asked what we stand for and who we are.  First, Libertarians seek freedom for all people, regardless of class, race, gender, age, religion, lifestyle, or any other clarifiers used by the mainstream parties to divide the American people. We simply want people to be free because they are human beings. Thus, we look at most policy issues from the stand point that people should be able to live how they want, so long as they are not hurting anyone else.  Next, we believe in our state, despite the high taxes, poor business climate, and nanny-state policies driving more of its residents across its borders, making it the number one state for emigration. We proudly support candidates committed to being part of the solution and dedicated to moving New Jersey toward a more Libertarian future. Please take a moment to check out our candidates here.  Lastly, we believe the government should be accountable to its people and responsive to their needs. Thus, we support projects such as the Preempted Ordinance Repeal Project, Open Government Project, and Police Accountability Project. Through these projects we help to ensure that various local and state governments are responding to changes in the law, sharing required information with the public, and keeping its peace-keepers in check.  Thank you for taking the time to visit our page and learn a little more about our organization. If you are already a member, please remember to renew your membership. And, if you are not a member but are interested in joining our team, please take a moment to join the NJLP here.  In Liberty,  Kevin Lowery  Chair, New Jersey Libertarian Party  What's a Libertarian?  Libertarians are fiscally responsible and socially compassionate. We are New Jersey's third largest and fastest-growing party. We believe liberty is the foundation of justice and a peaceful, prosperous America. We reject initiating violence against innocent people. We believe the role of government is to protect life, liberty and property.
What is this?  Someone who has restrained themselves in a chastity device may choose to have a keyholder; someone who keeps the keys to their chastity. Unfortunately we don't all have someone to do that for us, so some of us improvise.  Using a key lock box and some creativity it is possible to lock your keys away from yourself and leave only an image or a text file containing the combination. This site is a simple tool to hide a small file away from yourself for a predetermined length of time. Once the time has expired, you may re-download the file.  By registering an account on this website, you agree to all terms of the agreement which follows in this paragraph. You assert that you are of legal age to submit personal information and that your use of this site is legal for you. This site is intended for entertainment purposes only. You agree to use it at your own risk. The site's author may not be held responsible for any consequences of your use of this site including but not limited to the effects and side effects of programming errors and server outages. The author urges caution, regard for safety, and the use of common sense when partaking in any potentially dangerous activity. No adult content is available on this site, and no fees are charged for any service. Information collected will not be shared with any third parties except as required by law.
'Tragic yet beautiful': Thousands of healthy starfish wash up on Moreton Island off south-east Queensland  Updated  Thousands of starfish have washed up on Moreton Island off south-east Queensland in a mass stranding spanning kilometres.  Tour guide Rhett Ericsen-Miller filmed the starfish at the Ben-Ewa campsite, describing the spectacle "tragic yet beautiful".  Stunned tourists walking the beach feared it was "mass suicide" but University of Queensland marine biologist Kathy Townsend said it was a natural phenomenon.  Dr Townsend said a combination of a strong north-westerly and rough weather aligned to cause the animals to lose their grip on the seagrass beds in which they live.  The starfish, also known as sea stars, did not appear to have wasting disease or lesions.  "It is due to a change in the wind, weather, and tides," she said.  "All the conditions were in line for that event to occur."  Dr Townsend said the strandings usually happened once a year, but it is the second one in several weeks.  The population was still healthy, Dr Townsend said, despite the huge number of deaths.  "Just two days ago I was out there and there is still a lot," she said.  "It doesn't appear to have affected the population overall."  She recommended tourists throw the animals back into the sea to give them a chance at survival.  "They can survive a certain amount of dehydration," she said.  Speculation starfish have come together for breeding  School of Biological Sciences Adjunct Professor John Lucas said it was the time of year for starfish to breed.  "It is common for marine animals that shed their eggs and sperm into the water to aggregate to improve fertilisation rates," he said.  "There has obviously been mass mortality in a dense population."  The video of the stranding was posted on Facebook, acquiring more than 32,00 views since Monday.  Mr Ericsen-Miller's colleague Terry Howard said the starfish spread in batches for about 10 kilometres across the Island, off Brisbane, from Ben-Ewa to Tangalooma Point.  He was not overwhelmed by the sight.  He sees it every year.  "The tourists are surprised by it but they accept that it's part of what you see on the island."  Topics: animals, human-interest, cape-moreton-4025  First posted
Top picture: Nikolai Kozlov with his father. On Nikolai's chest there's a medal "for returning Crimea."  Source: Russian social network Vkontakte  The 31st Independent Guards Airborne Assault Brigade went for exercises on August 3. From Ulyanovsk (the unit's location) they went on trucks to Chebarkul training grounds in Chelyabinsk. Nikolai Kozlov, who grew up in Ozersk near Chelyabinsk, looked around yet the familiar Ural mountains were nowhere to be seen. Steppes stretched along the road. Soon everyone understood: They were going to Ukraine.  "They probably sent him to Crimea the same way: They allegedly redeploy you for exercises, and bang, you are in Sevastopol. The tour of duty order has been signed, you can't refuse. The system works the way that the brass knows what to do and the soldiers have no voice," says Nikolai's uncle, Sergei Kozlov. "I asked Nikolai, 'Did you sign any papers?' He said, 'If I had to, everything was signed for me.'"  According to Ozersk draft center, before June 2013, 21-year old Nikolai Kozlov, vehicle mechanic by profession, was doing compulsory military service in military unit 73612, the 31st Independent Guards Airborne Assault Brigade; since August 2013 he had been serving as a contract soldier in the same unit.  Nikolai's first military mission was in Crimea. According to photos the paratrooper's father posted to his Vkontakte page, at first Nikolai (as his father put it) "protected the new government in the uniform of young, unidentified polite people [Russian units in the covert invasion of Crimea] and then in a Berkut [former Ukrainian riot police unit] uniform." Now Nikolai's photo in a Ukrainian police uniform has been circulating on the Internet. Many have suggested that Russian paratroopers dressed as Berkut participated in dispersing the Maidan protests in February. Sergei believes the photo was taken in a corridor of the Supreme Council of Crimea that Nikolai probably guarded under the guise of a Berkut member. "The young are silly, they post photos everywhere: from Ukraine, from Crimea… no one saw any photos from Kyiv. Our guys probably weren't there. And then Nikolai is an anti-sabotage specialist, they weren't taught to wave batons."  With a medal "for returning Crimea" Nikolai returned to Ulyanovsk. He married. In August, he ended up in Ukraine.  Nikolai fought there for two weeks. According to the combat mission (as he explained to his cousin Dmitry), he suppressed the enemy artillery positions.  "Nikolai says Ukrainians are very clever and cunning fighters," Sergei told us. "Their artillery is surprisingly accurate. Kolya's unit was lured into a trap. First the Ukrainians took two of them prisoner. On August 24, our guys went to take them back and were fired upon."  As Kozlov told his uncle, they were shot with some armor-piercing gun. The first shot tore Nikolai's leg off.  "Everyone thought him dead," Sergei Kozlov says. "One of the soldiers managed to carry him away from the line of fire. Nikolai himself tourniqueted what was left of his leg to stop the bleeding and injected the medicines."  Then for two days they drove Kolya, with sepsis, fever and a great loss of blood, back to the border. In the Rostov military hospital (full of wounded, according to Kolya) he was operated on and sent to Moscow.  The paratrooper first called home from the Central military clinical hospital named after Vishnevsky. The officers did not bother, so Kolya had to borrow someone's mobile phone. "He only named the hospital, and it has loads of branches all over Moscow region. Thank God I live in Moscow. I started looking for him, enlisted my friends and barely managed to find him," Sergei says.  According to doctors' predictions, Nikolai will stay in the hospital for more than four months. According to official figures from the military insurance company, soldiers who become Group 1 disabled get 1.5 million rubles. "That's about 15 months of German unemployment benefits," Sergei counts. "Not enough to become disabled in your youth." Sergei notes that as he spoke to his nephew he did not notice that the latter had any interest in the events in Ukraine or went to fight for his ideas.  "What politics, the guy's 20… An airborne assault brigade is the elite, the special forces," Sergei Kozlov says. "It's cool there, you have a good chance to get to the UN peacekeeping force and see the world. That's what Nikolai went there for. They do get brain
Helloooo from LA!   We finally got to move in to our new pad, where filming for our E! show has commenced! This place is AMAZING. The use of shouty capitals is to emphasise just how frikking amazing it is. You get the jist.   Let's introduce you to some of the crew, behind the scenes. These guys camp out in our garage, rather like a creepy bunch of stalkers, listening in to everything we say and watching what we do. Bit like how Twitter works really eh? ;) Not that we're calling you a creepy bunch of stalkers. Replace creepy with filthy, dirty minded and we might be along the right tracks.   I digress..   Like most big pimpin' houses, ours also has a swimming pool. Although the weather is good in LA, it's not quite possibly 'swimming weather' yet. Max found this out a little too late, as he dived straight in to the wet abyss without a second thought. Some things never change.   Like with most reality shows there's a confessional room, where people can give their honest thoughts and opinions. This is where you're gonna hear it straight from us...we may be spending quite a bit of time in here..   Forgive me Fanmily for I have sinned, my last confession must have been at least two minutes ago..   Max is a happy lad as his brother Jack has come to visit and they got some quality bonding time, shooting balls in the back of a net. You know, as you do.   Lil Nath had another checkup with the voice doctor, we're pleased to report things are getting better! He still needs to keep his voice down for a bit longer though, things are definitely getting better ;)   Big Kev has found his stride, keeping up with the fast paced life in LA..   Of course whilst we're gallivanting around this house we haven't forgotten that we need to finish our album, so have been getting some studio sessions in. Siva likes to set the right scene, when laying down vocals and is never happier than when stood inside what can only be described as a poor man's Santa's Grotto. Is that actual Christmas trees on the wallpaper...? We're not sure.   We hope you're having a good week wherever you are, until next time.   Love,  The Lads x
Trump's First 100 Days: Too Soon To Claim Big Job Gains?  Enlarge this image President Trump addresses a crowd at Boeing's facilities in in North Charleston, S.C., on Feb. 17. Sean Rayford/Getty Images hide caption toggle caption Sean Rayford/Getty Images President Trump addresses a crowd at Boeing's facilities in in North Charleston, S.C., on Feb. 17. Sean Rayford/Getty Images  President Trump has said over and over that President Trump has said over and over that creating jobs is at the top of his agenda. It may seem unfair to judge his progress on this goal in his first 100 days , but Trump has opened the door to scrutiny by making his own assertions on job creation.  During a White House meeting with CEOs on April 11, Trump claimed his administration had already created During a White House meeting with CEOs on April 11, Trump claimed his administration had already created over 600,000 jobs  "You see what's going on. You see the numbers," he said. "We've created over 600,000 jobs already in a very short period of time, and it's going to really start catching on now because some of the things that we've done are big league and they are catching on."  Since the beginning of the year, the Labor Department says, the U.S. has created Since the beginning of the year, the Labor Department says, the U.S. has created 533,000 jobs . Of course, Trump only took office on Jan. 20, and the January numbers are generally attributed to the outgoing president, because the new president hasn't had a chance to put his policies in place.  So, at most Trump could take credit for 219,000 jobs in February and 98,000 in March. That's a total of about 317,000 — about half his original claim. (The White House website now touts So, at most Trump could take credit for 219,000 jobs in February and 98,000 in March. That's a total of about 317,000 — about half his original claim. (The White House website now touts "over 500,000 new jobs."  Monthly Change In Payrolls (Seasonally Adjusted) 2015 2016 2017 0 +100,000 +200,000 +300,000 +400,000 March 2017: +98,000 jobs Note: Figures for Feburary and March 2017 are preliminary. Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics Credit: Alyson Hurt/NPR  And there's a good argument to be made that presidents shouldn't take credit for a role in job creation until well into their first term, after they've had a chance to influence the course of events with policies or leadership. Trump has announced a number of And there's a good argument to be made that presidents shouldn't take credit for a role in job creation until well into their first term, after they've had a chance to influence the course of events with policies or leadership. Trump has announced a number of executive actions that he says will help create U.S. jobs, but so far the effect of those actions has been minimal.  Economist Douglas Holtz-Eakin, a former director of the Congressional Budget Office and top economic adviser to Sen. John McCain's presidential campaign, points out that Trump inherited an economy near Economist Douglas Holtz-Eakin, a former director of the Congressional Budget Office and top economic adviser to Sen. John McCain's presidential campaign, points out that Trump inherited an economy near full employment  "That's a very different world than his predecessor Barack Obama entered," says Holtz-Eakin. Obama faced " "That's a very different world than his predecessor Barack Obama entered," says Holtz-Eakin. Obama faced " hundreds of thousands of jobs lost every month," and so "a lot of job creation needed to be done." Obama managed to get a big stimulus package through Congress, along with taking additional action to rescue automakers during his first 100 days.  But, Holtz-Eakin says, "the task is different now." Trump's job is not faster job creation, but switching the focus to boosting the productivity of workers, which could support higher wages and make incomes grow more rapidly, Holtz-Eakin says. That will require passing complex plans like business tax reform and health care legislation to replace the Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare. Holtz-Eakin says it remains to be seen whether Trump and the Congress can achieve those goals.  What about Trump's flurry of activity during the presidential transition — after he was elected but before he took office? Trump has made a big deal of twisting corporate arms to save U.S. jobs at What about Trump's flurry of activity during the presidential transition — after he was elected but before he took office? Trump has made a big deal of twisting corporate arms to save U.S. jobs at automakers and companies like Carrier.  In the case of Carrier, In the case of Carrier,
Nathan Williams has recently been branching away from Wavves to focus on some other projects, most notably Sweet Valley and a possible collaboration with Cloud Nothings' Dylan Baldi. He announced another new project today called Spirit Club via Twitter, this time with his brother Joel and Andrew Caddick, who records under the name Jeans Wilder. The first offering from the group is a 7-inch, "Eye Dozer" b/w "Sling," which you can listen to and download below.  Spirit Club – "Eye Dozer"  Spirit Club – "Sling"  Gonna release new music today…just a heads up… Not wavves.. Not sweet valley. — WAVVES (@wavves) October 7, 2014  Alright ppl I'll post 7" art, two new songs and media fire link in next five min. The songs were all written and recorded at my house — WAVVES (@wavves) October 7, 2014  (SPIRIT CLUB IS ANDREW CADDICK, NATHAN WILLIAMS AND JOEL WILLIAMS) — WAVVES (@wavves) October 7, 2014  No word on a physical release yet, but the back cover art indicates that it may be due out on Williams' Ghost Ramp label.
Destiny Story Lawsuit & Pikmin 4 Announced - IGN Daily Fix  Lawsuit papers confirm Destiny story changes and Pikmin 4 development is close to being completed. Plus, a new Wii U bundle is on its way and Metal Gear Solid 5: The Phantom Pain experiences save file issues.
Helen Radkey, excommunicated from the Mormon church, is now a familiar presence at its genealogy research center in Salt Lake City. (Tom Smart/FOR THE WASHINGTON POST)  Mitt Romney has major headaches named Rick Santorum and Newt Gingrich.  This month, he also had Helen Radkey.  At 1:55 p.m. on Feb. 8, Radkey, an excommunicated Mormon who spends her days combing through databases at the church's Family History Library, ­e-mailed Rabbi Abraham Cooper, the associate dean of the Simon Wiesenthal Center, named for the famed Nazi-hunter.  "FYI, discovered today: Posthumous baptisms for the parents of Simon Wiesen­thal," Radkey wrote. "I am collecting evidence, which will be e-mailed to you, if requested, as long as there is a public stink."  The Wiesenthal Center obliged, and a week later, Radkey followed with the revelation that Elie Wiesel, the Nobel Peace Prize winner and Holocaust survivor, was also listed in the private Mormon databases as " 'ready' for posthumous rites." This appeared to be a violation of the spirit of the Mormon agreement with Jewish groups not to posthumously baptize Holocaust victims and led to Wiesel's public appeal to Romney to demand that his church stick to its word. All the reports credited Radkey, an independent researcher in Salt Lake City, as the force behind the revelations.  Radkey, an eccentric and familiar face at the church's sprawling genealogical archive here, has a knack for notoriety.  She has acquired a measure of acclaim for her discovery that Mormons in the Provo, Utah, temple had posthumously baptized Barack Obama's mother, Stanley Ann Dunham, during the 2008 presidential campaign, as well as revealing that Joan of Arc, Charlie Chaplin, Humphrey Bogart and Marilyn Monroe had also received proxy baptisms.  Now Radkey's energies are directed at a new area of research, which she hopes will cause a new headache for Romney: the posthumous plural marriages of his ancestors. She calls this "Romney's polygamy tree."  * * *  On a recent afternoon in Radkey's apartment on the outskirts of Salt Lake City, a menorah and Virgin Mary statuette stood atop the refrigerator, a Buddha sat under a lamp and Egyptian sun gods rested on a coffee table. A book called "The Animal Wise Tarot" helped explain the preponderance of wolf posters hanging on the walls alongside a framed "universal life church minister" certification.  "The only thing I won't talk about is my metaphysical work," Radkey, 69, wearing a red sweater and black beret, said in her Australian accent. She explained that it would be used by the church to discredit her research. She preferred to leaf through stacks of manila folders labeled "Gaskell Romney, grandfather," "Archi­bald Newell Hall, great-great grandfather," and "Parley Parker Pratt, great-great grandfather."  Radkey, who is a regular guest on the weekly cable show "Polygamy: What Love Is This?" ("a live, call-in television talk show dedicated to the subject of polygamy and Mormon fundamentalism"), has decided that the world should know about what she considers the posthumous love life of Romney's forebears.  This is because, she said, "there's a double standard" in which Mormons have renounced polygamy for the living, but "allowed plural marriages for the dead."  More important for her, she found Romney's depiction of polygamy — he called it "bizarre" and "awful" — in bad taste. "How dare he say that polygamy was horrible when it was what his ancestors believed?" she said. "I believe you should honor your bloodline. I have convicts in my bloodline. I don't reject them."  * * *  Posthumous baptisms are a sacred ritual that Mormons believe offer a second shot at salvation in the afterlife to those who never received Mormon baptism on Earth.  The church insists that there is no polygamy in the afterlife. "We believe that marriage is the most important relationship in this life and can continue after this life when performed in a temple. Temple marriages — also known as sealings — are performed only for those married in this life," said Michael Purdy, a church spokesman.  Radkey, however, has produced documents from private church databases that suggest many prominent Mormons, including Romney's ancestors, have been sealed to multiple spouses after they died.  This obsession with clandestine Mormon rituals is four decades in the making for a woman about whom the Salt Lake Tribune asked in a 2009 profile: "Who is Helen Radkey and why is she out to get the LDS Church?"  In 1963, two Mormon missionaries knocked on her door in Hobart, Australia,
Taiwan elected its first female president on Saturday, a member of a pro-independence party, in a victory over her nationalist rival that caused China to issue a stern warning of caution.  Tsai Ing-wen, 59, called for unity during her victory speech on Saturday, stating she would seek a "consistent, predictable and sustainable" relationship with China after it was announced she had taken approximately 56 percent of the vote.  "Both sides have a responsibility to do their utmost to find mutually acceptable ways to interact with respect and reciprocity and ensure no provocation and no surprises," Tsai said, who leads the Democratic Progressive Party.  The two governments have been meshed for decades in a confusing diplomatic tangle but have increasingly been linked economically, also forming a relative level of peace over the last eight years.  China views Taiwan as a secessionist province, one that it has threatened to retake with force, while Taiwan calls itself a sovereign state.  The scenario began playing out after World War II, when allied forces handed control of Taiwan to China. China has been aiming hundreds of missiles at Taiwan since members of Chinese nationalists fled the mainland and Communists came to power during China's civil war, according to Reuters.  Taiwan has a separate constitution and democratic elections and uses its own military force with 300,00 active troops.  President-elect Tsai favors independence for Taiwan but had struck a conciliatory note during her campaign with the island's mainland neighbor, though she indicated she would not budge on issues of Taiwan's sovereignty.  "Our democracy, national identity and international space must be fully respected and any suppression would undermine the stability of cross-strait relations," she said.  After her victory, China on Saturday said it would not allow an independent Taiwan, stating that the two governments would eventually be merged into one.  "On important issues of principle like protecting the country's sovereignty and territorial integrity our will is as hard as rock," said a statement released by Chinese state media.  The United States on Saturday congratulated Tsai and said it holds "profound interest" in maintaining stability between China and Taiwan.
The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office reinforced what private-sector economists have been saying for months: The best proposals to spur the economy would cost the government but prove better at quickly creating jobs than pursuing an anti-regulatory policy as proposed Republicans in Congress.  CBO Director Douglas Elmendorf said extending unemployment benefits or payroll tax breaks to those who are most likely to spend the money, as well as providing as tax credits to companies that hire new workers, are among the types of policies that could best boost the economy and create jobs. Rolling back regulations would not have the same immediate jolt, according to a new report.  "The economic effects of certain changes in regulatory policies probably would be too small or would occur too slowly to significantly alter overall output or employment in the next two years," Elmendorf wrote this week on the CBO blog.  The CBO's analysis comes as Congress is deeply divided over the best approach for strengthening the sluggish economy at a time when jobs are the top issue on voters' minds. The congressional super committee is also struggling to reduce deficits. The report offered a gloomy outlook under current policies, with an estimated 9% unemployment rate through 2012 and economic growth lower than potential.
City councils are attempting to hide the level of economic decay suffered in some Northern Ireland towns by painting fake storefronts on closed-down businesses in anticipation of the G8 economic summit this month.  Around 300,000 pounds of government funds have been invested on sprucing up more than 100 properties in the Northern Ireland county of Fermanagh, which will host the international G8 economic summit June 17-18, The Irish Times reports. Closed storefronts have been painted to resemble working stores, complete with doors that appear open but don't function and two-dimensional goods hanging from the windows, all in an effort to hide the dereliction caused by the economic struggles of the past few years, according to the Irish Times.  "We want to present the county as best as we can and promote it in terms of industry and tourism," local Council Chief Executive Brendan Hegarty told The Irish Times, calling the project a "phenomenal opportunity."  But some locals view the superficial efforts as a wasteful attempt to hide real economic struggles. This particular area in Northern Ireland suffers higher child poverty rates than the rest of the country, ThinkProgress reports. Meanwhile, lost jobs and failed businesses in the fallout from the global financial crisis are recovering at a glacial pace -- economic growth in Northern Ireland is expected to remain under 0.5 percent through 2014, Belfast Telegraph reports.  "No one is fooled," Phil Flanagan, a former owner of a closed butcher shop which has now been papered over to appear as if it's still thriving, told The Telegrpah. "It is like when your mother-in-law is coming to visit and you give the house a tidy up."  Indeed, such attempts to hide harsh economic realities aren't new. In 2010, the U.K. town of North Tyneside painted nearly an entire street with decoy storefronts to hide the effects of recession, the BBC reports.  But not everyone in County Fermanagh views the fake shops negatively. The project has provided a much needed stimulus in the form of jobs for painters and construction workers, according to the BBC.  "The town looks fantastic, it's a good excuse for people to get doing work," one painter said.
Hodl is an intentional misspelling of the word "hold," which is used among cryptocurrency enthusiasts when encouraging traders to resist the urge to sell one's holdings in response to market fluctuations. ... On December 18th, 2013, Bitcoin Talk Forums[1] user GameKyuubi submitted a ...
The United Nations Representative for International Migration, Peter Sutherland , has warned that the common humanity of Europeans could be sacrificed by a populist anti-immigrant mood fuelled by misinformation or a lack of information.  Mr Sutherland said yesterday the disgraceful situation in the refugee camp in Calais reflected European disarray on migration and refugees.  He said while the EU had made sensible proposals, a number of states, mainly in central and eastern Europe, had refused to subscribe and participate.  "If Germany can handle 800,000 to one million refugees this year, plus 500,000 a year for the following five years, why can't France (with help from the UK) not solve the problem of 3,000 people in Calais?  "For that matter why cannot every EU country (including the UK) share fairly in the relocation of migrants from Greece and Italy in particular, and also the resettlement of refugees from Turkey, Jordan and Lebanon?"  Mr Sutherland, a former EU commissioner, was speaking at a conference on boat migrants held in UCD yesterday.  He told the conference he had visited the Calais camp two weeks ago on a day of serious disturbances.  Truly shocking  "The conditions in which the migrants were living were truly shocking. Doctors there told me of clear evidence of TB and scabies. This is a disgrace. It is also a clear example of the broader inadequacies in Europe's practical expression of its much vaunted values."  Mr Sutherland said notwithstanding an estimated 60 per cent of the 3,000 in the camp probably being eligible for refugee status, there was a reluctance by governments to follow through, on the basis the host county would then have to grant asylum.  He said the people there remained determined "by hook or by crook" to make it to the UK.  "The site itself is a living reproach to European society – a desperate place populated by desperate people. There, the one shaft of light is to be found in the stream – even a tide – of volunteer helpers. These often come from micro NGOs from France, the UK and some from Ireland," he said.  Mr Sutherland traced the background of the people in the camp, the majority of whom have fled from war-torn countries.  "The compulsion to leave was obviously so powerful that the migrants were prepared to spend their last pennies and risk their lives in rickety boats to escape."  Over 2,700 have drowned this year. Others have been dying for years in the Mediterranean, but it took one heart-rending photograph to bring a temporary constructive reaction."  Catastrophe  He suggested that if people were assessed before they left north Africa, then the catastrophes that have occurred would reduce greatly in number.  He said the continuing state of affairs threatened the internal cohesion of the EU and the maintenance of European values. He argued for a common EU policy for migrants and refugees, which he said was "indispensable" for the improvement of the current situation.  "This policy must recognise that proximity does not create responsibility for migrants or refugees. Why should Lebanon have over one-quarter of its population made up of Syrian refugees? Or why should Turkey have 1.7 million? For that matter, why should Italy and Greece have such disproportionate numbers just because they are on the Mediterranean?  "Why did the UK agree to take less than 5,000 a year for the next few years from outside the EU for resettlement, but none from Greece or Italy for relocation from inside? Why is there no real sharing of responsibility for refugees?"  He said that harmonisation and the oversight of refugee camps had to be centrally co-ordinated.  "We must surely develop policies that effectively discourage illegal migrants, but open opportunities for legal migration.  "There has to be a balance in our policies. And those policies have to be developed in dialogue with the countries of origin and transit," he said.
Estonia's Ministry of Defence (MoD) has accused Russia's military of violating the Nato member's airspace for the fourth time in 2016, a claim denied by Moscow. Estonia claims Russian planes regularly approach or intrude into the country's air space.  In a statement Estonia claimed the Russian Antonov An-72 transport aircraft flew close to the northern island of Vaindloo in the Baltic Sea for around 90 seconds at 18.23 local time on Monday evening (5 September). The statement said the Russian pilot ignored Estonia's air traffic control despite its responders being switched on.  There have been regular squabbles between the Nato alliance and Russia in the Baltic region, which is close to the Russian border. Both sides accuse the other of ignoring transponders, though according to Postimees newspaper most Russian planes are fitted with Soviet-era transponders which render Western civilian radar "blind" to them.  This transponder issue could result in a civilian airliner accidentally colliding with a Russian jet, said Postimees. The newspaper quotes an anonymous Russian officer who admitted most Russian jets don't even possess transponders.  Russia's Ministry of Defence spokesman Igor Konashenkov told state news agency Itar-Tass that no Russian planes were in the area at the time of the alleged incident. "Aircraft from Russia's air force regularly carry out flights over the Baltic Sea, however their routes fall strictly within international rules and regulations on using airspace and neutral waters," said Konashenkov, according to Newsweek.  Bulgaria, also a Nato member, says Russia violated its airspace on 10 occasions in July 2016 alone, four of which were by military aircraft. Turkey also accused Russia of violating its airspace on several occasions before shooting down a Russian jet in December 2015.  Relations between Russia and the West have worsened since the Ukraine crisis and annexation of Crimea in 2014. Both sides accuse the other of dangerous manoeuvres in the skies. Security experts fear one misjudged manoeuvre or mistake could even lead to armed conflict.
Please enable Javascript to watch this video  CLEVELAND (CNN) -- Donald Trump's latest reality show roared into Ohio on Thursday night.  Within a few minutes of his first debate as a Republican presidential candidate, Trump ridiculed comedian Rosie O'Donnell and griped about his treatment by Fox News anchor Megyn Kelly. But it was his refusal to rule out a third-party presidential run -- a move that could deny Republicans the White House -- that drew gasps in the audience and sparked anger from his opponents.  "I mean, this is what's wrong. He buys and sells politicians of all stripes. He's already hedging his bet on the Clintons, OK?" said Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul.  The ever-unapologetic Trump then chastised the country for being too "politically correct."  "I've been challenged by so many people and I don't frankly have time for total political correctness," Trump quipped.  Explosive start  It was an explosive start to the first GOP debate in a campaign season already upended by Trump, the unfiltered and brash real estate magnate. It was immediately apparent that classic Trump showed up to the debate -- someone who pushes the boundaries and has no qualms about leveling personal attacks in public.  Kelly challenged Trump on some of his past comments about women.  "You call women you don't like fat pigs, dogs, slobs and disgusting animals," she said.  Trump quickly responded: "Only Rosie O'Donnell."  Meanwhile, immigration loomed large at the debate -- an issue that Trump claimed full credit for bringing to the nation's attention.  "If it weren't for me, you wouldn't be even talking about illegal immigration, Chris," Trump said to Fox News host Chris Wallace. "This was not a subject that was on anyone's mind until I brought it up at my announcement."  Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, who has been trailing in second place behind Trump in the polls, addressed the issue by stressing that he did not support "amnesty." His stance on what to do about the millions of undocumented immigrants in the country has dogged Bush.  "We need to be much more strategic on how we deal with border enforcement, border security," Bush said. "We need to eliminate the sanctuary cities in this country. It is ridiculous and tragic that people are dying because of the fact that local governments are not following the law."  Trump was smack in the center of the debate lineup. The lower tier of presidential contenders had their brief moment in the sun earlier Thursday at a debate in which Carly Fiorina delivered a memorable and polished performance.  High-stakes moment for Trump  But the prime-time debate attracted more attention and served as a particularly high-stakes moment for Trump, whose early dominance has both stunned -- and aggravated -- members of his own party. National Republican leaders have at times seemed unsure of what to make of the fact that such a no-filter politician with no obligations to the party could unexpectedly become the GOP's standard-bearer. The evening was also an opportunity for Bush to move past a shaky few days that included controversial comments about women's health care along with an uncomfortable performance at a New Hampshire candidate forum.  The open contempt for Trump was on full display at the earlier debate. It took only 11 minutes before candidates came out swinging against Trump.  Lesser-known contenders including former Texas Gov. Rick Perry and Fiorina slammed Trump, blasting the billionaire businessman's conservative credentials and friendly relationship with Hillary and Bill Clinton.  "I talked about Donald Trump from the standpoint of being an individual who is using his celebrity rather than his conservatism," said Perry, who has positioned himself as one of Trump's biggest antagonists on the trail. "How can you run for the Republican nomination and be for single-payer health care?"  For his part, Trump found ways to mock his rivals. When asked to address some of his businesses that went bankrupt, Trump pivoted to the financial woes of New Jersey -- a clear swipe at Christie.  "I had the good sense to leave Atlantic City, which by the way, Caesars just went bankrupt," Trump said, then gestured to Christie. "Chris can tell you."  Later in the debate, Bush cautioned that Trump's "divisive" language could be detrimental to the Republican Party.  "We're going to win when we unite people with a hopeful, optimistic message," he said.  A Bloomberg survey released Tuesday had Trump at 21%, handing him a double-digit lead over both Bush, who was at 10%, and Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, who was at 8%.  Trump, Bush, Paul and Walker were on the prime-time debate stage with Mike Huckabee, Ben Carson, Ted Cruz, Marco Rubio, Chris Christie and John Kasich.  Christie-Paul fued  At one point, the debate stage turned into
GAME INFO RiME May 26th, 2017 Platform PC (Steam), PlayStation 4, Xbox One, Switch Publisher Grey Box Developer Tequila Works  In the past few years, we have heard stories of troubled development involving some high profile titles like Final Fantasy XV and The Last Guardian, but there are also smaller titles that didn't have it easy, like Tequila Works' RiME. The game, originally announced as a PlayStation 4 exclusive, eventually went multiplatform sometime after its announcement, and many feared that the long and troubled development might have compromised director Raúl Rubio's vision. Not only did this not happen, but Tequila Works ended up developing a game that is almost on par with Team Ico's exceptional adventure games.  Everything in RiME is shrouded in mystery, starting from its premise. A young, unnamed boy, finds himself stranded on a mysterious island following a torrential storm. All alone on this mysterious island, the young boy is beckoned by a massive tower that he will only be able to reach by solving the many puzzles that litter the island. His only help is a fox, which will always guide the boy on the right path. Making the journey even more mysterious, is a red-cloaked figure that always seems to be a step ahead of the boy.  Related Rime 2 Would Be A Spiritual Successor, Says Tequila Works, But Isn't Happening Anytime Soon  RiME's story isn't told through words, but through the beauty of the island's flora and fauna, the music, the ruins and a variety of murals which may make little sense in the beginning. As the boy proceeds through the island, however, things will start making sense, and players won't be able to help but appreciate how every visual and audio element of the game is an integral part of the narrative. Like in the Team Ico games, it's a deep and emotional journey that cannot be forgotten easily.  RiME's storytelling approach isn't the only feature that's been masterfully crafted, as the adventuring and puzzle solving elements are just as good. Unlike similar games like last year's The Witness, players will hardly feel lost while exploring RiME's luscious setting, as the game is not an open world experience. Sure, there's a lot of optional areas to explore, areas where players can find collectibles which give more information on the boy's backstory, but players can decide to just go from one puzzle to the next without having to worry about going in the wrong direction. With all the mystery surrounding the boy and the island, this approach is probably the correct one to avoid making players feel completely lost.  Related Unravel Two Review – Co-Op Multiplayer Is Coming Home  While exploration and platforming are very important elements in the RiME's experience, they're not as central as puzzles, and Tequila Works nailed this aspect in the best possible way. Every area of the island begins with simple puzzles that teach a basic mechanic around which are based all the later ones found in the same area. This makes sure that puzzles never feel dull, as players always have to deal with creative variations of a basic, yet engaging formula. As for the mechanics behind the puzzles, Tequila Works has been extremely creative, including simple stuff like turning on switches by making the boy shout, moving blocks in the current position, aligning elements, manipulating the time of day and more which gets turned upside down with more complicated variations, like activating several switches found in different locations at the same time, using environmental elements to avoid dangers and many others. One thing is certain: playing RiME is never a dull affair.  With narration being done with unconventional means, it's not surprising to see how RiME's presentation is phenomenal. The game employs a cel-shaded style which makes both characters and setting look almost straight out of a fairytale. The different outdoor areas deserve quite a bit of praise, specifically, as they look incredible in motion, also thanks to the day and night cycle and various lighting effects. Everything looks so gorgeous and alive that more than a few players will be taking a lot of screenshots. Music is also nicely done, with some very emotional pieces making the journey through the island even more memorable.  Talking specifically about the PC version of the game, RiME is definitely a solid port, with several supported resolutions and various graphics options. Unfortunately, the included anti-aliasing options are not the best: FXAA is not that good, TXAA only works on NVIDIA GPUs and SSAA impacts performance considerably. The inclusion of TAA and SMAA would have been preferred.  RiME does great what it sets out to do: provide an emotional and engaging experience that very few players will be able to forget. As with similar games, however, the Tequila Works developed adventure is not a game for everyone: it is a journey of mystery and self-discovery, a journey that's supposed to make players think, and not only about
One thing you'll notice about My Summer Car, you're going to need to drink a few berooskis otherwise there's a chance there may be a keyboard going through the wall.  Contents show]  Basics  You might want to run to the store in the van to stock up on food and drinks before you start building the car. You might also want some way of cooling yourself down, because you will get very, very hot and frustrated from building and playing a lot.  Before you leave, load up your van with canisters. Diesel canister (black) is in the barn where the tractor is at. A spare petrol can (green) is in the back left corner of the garage. When you're at the store fill up the van's tank and both of the canisters. From the store, make sure you buy everything from the left wall. The fan belt, multiple canisters of each fluids. They will be important for building and starting the engine for the first time, so don't be afraid to spend almost 3,000 mk.  Below you will find a recommended shopping list for your first trip to Teimo's Shop:  ↑ Depends on route and driving skills.  Note: If saving at the store; save before doing the shopping, as the shopping bag will open upon reloading the game.  Starting the van  To start and drive the van, get in by jumping into the seat (you should automatically crouch when entering the cab of any vehicle). Start the van by left clicking on the ignition (left side of steering wheel), then wait for the glow plug indicator to turn off before clicking and holding down to crank the engine. The same procedure applies to other diesel engines in the game. Headlights are to the left of the radio near the gearshift. Disengage the handbrake by holding right click, do it again if the parking brake indicator is still on.  Make sure you turn off H-shifter at the main menu if you're using a gamepad or keyboard and mouse. By default; X is clutch, G to shift up, B to shift down.  Finding the store  To find the store, head right down the dirt road from your house and keep taking right turns until you find the store, the shortcuts through the lake are no longer viable, but an alternative route that is longer, but sometimes faster is to turn left and then turn right twice, and then take the second intersection, allowing you to drive more on the asphalt road.  Eating and drinking  To drink beer and eat food, look at the beer/food and press the action button (default F ). You can also drink from the kitchen or bathroom tap by turning the tap on, then crouching next to it (default Q ).  Making money  To make money, there is a barn to the right down the road from your house. Inside is a chopping block and an axe which you can use to make money. Click the log stack to put a log on the chopping block. Click the axe, hit action button (default F ), then right click to swing.  There is also a tractor in the barn. You can use this to tow your car by driving the tractor near it, then left clicking a tow hitch. Left click again to disconnect. You can also use the forklift to pick up your car using the front hydraulics lever from the right side of drivers seat. Don't lower it too far or it will glitch up the tractor.  Saving the game  To save your game, go to the nearest toilet and select "Save & Quit"  If you damage the body of your car, you can repair it by doing the following:  Navigate to C:\Users\Username\AppData\LocalLow\Amistech\My Summer Car .  . Delete meshsave.txt from the folder.  Your car bodywork will now be repaired with your work intact. This will not replace broken windows or parts that have come unscrewed as a result of damage, and food you have eaten prior to reloading will still be gone.  Make meshsave.txt a read only file if you want damage to be repaired upon reloading.  Building the Satsuma  Before building  There are some things that could save a lot of hassle during and after the car assembly:  Most damageable parts are in critical condition at the start of the game. These parts can be serviced at the repair shop, but the smarter, though slightly more expensive option is to buy new ones from the repair shop shelf. Replacing everything will be very expensive, but all parts will eventually get replaced anyway. The easiest way to make a quick buck is to take the wrecked cars to Fleetari, but there are also other ways to make money.  Ordering the fuel mixture gauge and ratchet set from the parts
I have always thought the phrase was "pique my interest" as in:  Her mysterious background piqued my interest.  However, of late, on blogs and social networks, I have seen people using "peek my interest", as in:  Disney is starting to peek my interest.  And I have even seen:  Samsung's latest display peaks my interest in the company.  Which is the correct phrase?
The All Blacks have overcome another staunch Pumas challenge to win 35-17 in Buenos Aires and clinch the Rugby Championship with a round to spare.  Winger Rieko Ioane scored two of New Zealand's five tries as they did enough to maintain their historic unbeaten record against the improving Pumas.   It also handed the All Blacks the SANZAAR silverware for a third successive year, achieving it before next week's final-round encounter against the in-form Springboks in Pretoria.  Coming off a shock 36-34 home loss to South Africa, the visitors dominated the scrum and were more clinical with their finishing in an otherwise-even contest at Estadio Jose Amalfitani.  As with the 22-point win over the Pumas in Nelson earlier this month, the All Blacks were flattered by the final scoreline.   Ioane's double, which took him to 20 tries from 19 Tests, came against the run of play as the visitors opened up a 21-3 halftime lead.   Five-eighth Beauden Barrett landed all five of his conversions in a return to goalkicking form after a forgettable return against the Springboks.   The pick of a mostly second-string pack was No.8 Ardie Savea, a late call-up to start in place of Luke Whitelock who was ruled out through illness.   Two botched New Zealand lineouts helped five-eighth Nicolas Sanchez open the scoring with a penalty.   However, the All Blacks got the next one right and put Ioane in space for his first try via slick backline work.   Fellow-winger Waisake Naholo stretched out from close range to extend the lead before Ioane had his second when he pounced on a spilled ball and was untroubled in a 30m dash to the line.   The All Blacks spent long periods either side of halftime defending their line, achieving it while down to 14 men for 10 minutes after Sonny Bill Williams was shown a 37th-minute yellow card for his team's repeat offending.   New Zealand's ruthless streak was emphasised when they forged a rare attack and immediately crossed through reserve lock Patrick Tuipulotu.   Argentina sent a scare through the world champions when reserve halfback Tomas Cubelli and fullback Emiliano Boffelli crossed in quick succession.   Anton Lienert-Brown had the final say when scoring off a neat grubber from fellow-reserve back Richie Mo'unga.
About Scooby Werkstatt (YouTube: Scooby1961)  Scooby Now  I got a late start in fitness, I was one of those awkward, lanky, clumsy kids who always got picked last when choosing teams in PE class – not athletic in the slightest. I really didn't do anything fitness wise till I was 21 and started lifting weights. After starting to lift weights, a wonderful thing happened. My confidence and self-esteem skyrocketed and I wasn't painfully shy any more. With my newfound strength and confidence I discovered that I actually liked sports! Although I completely lack natural athletic ability, I found that I could get better with practice. I picked up skating, hiking, volleyball, cycling, windsurfing, running and swimming. I'm 53 years old now and have been lifting weights an hour a day, five-six days a week, 52 weeks a year, for the last 30 years. I take at most one week off from weights a year, but usually only skip a day or two. I reached my genetic potential at about age 40 and my strength, weight and bodyfat has remained essentially constant since then. Although I workout even harder and smarter now than I did at age 30, because of my age the hard work just prevents a backslide. Since gaining mass is no longer a possibility, the last five years I have focused my fitness goals on endurance events and sports. I have been doing long distance cycling races and triathlons and in 2012 achieved my fitness goals of doing a double century (200 mile bike race) and Half Ironman triathlon. In 2015 my goals are to bike across Burma and do my first men's physique contest. Please read about my goals!  [instagram-feed id="1526752821″ num=3 cols=3]   I started the scoobysworkshop website back in 2004 because I got fed up with how fitness and bodybuilding had become nothing more than another big business run by money hungry corporations. I was looking for some fitness info on the web and I was disgusted that the only thing that came up were slimy ones all trying to push expensive books, newsletters, and supplements. The only good unbiased website I found was a Christian based one but it hadn't been updated in several years and wasn't very complete. Bodybuilding has done a lot for me and I wanted to give back to the community and help those without money to build healthy, awesome physiques. In this era of high-tech fancy machines and expensive neon lined gyms, people have forgotten that bodybuilding started out with very simple equipment – namely just cheap dumbbells and barbells. I wanted to show the people with no money how to build the same ripped, muscular physiques as the ones who can afford supplements and expensive gym memberships.  Who IS Scooby Werkstatt?  What makes me tick? What defines who I am? I think the best way to do this is to tell you about the six things that are important to me.  My passion for fitness and sports. Bodybuilding has changed my life and I want to pass this on to everyone who will listen. I feel strongly that a great physique should be available to all regardless of economic ability which is why I spend 20hrs per week after work and on weekends making my free videos and working on my free website. Fitness is my passion. Not only do I work to pass on my love of fitness but I still actively participate myself. Triathlon is my competitive sport and beach volleyball is my recreational sport. If I had to choose one thing that defined me, my love of fitness would be it. My love of engineering and building things. If I had to choose the second most important thing that defines me it would be my love of building things. As a kid I was always out in the garage building go-karts or tinkering in the garage. My degree is in engineering and I continue to love it to this day. I have build a houses, airplane, furniture, and a computer from scratch. I truly love building things. My spirituality. As many have commented, I am religious although I don't like that label. Although the rest of our family are strict Dutch Reformed, I was raised a good Protestant and although the values I learned have stuck with me, I don't consider myself a Protestant. My beliefs don't seem to fall in line with any organized religion but that doesn't make me any less spiritual. When people ask what my religion is I tell them they will have to guess by my actions because I'm not quite sure myself 🙂 I consider taking care of friends, family and complete strangers part of spirituality. My love of airplanes. At age 7 I started building rubber powered model airplanes and I never stopped. My entire life I have been flying model airplanes and they got more complex with time. My high school had an aviation program so I jumped at the chance to learn to fly. Thru some amazing deal I got
"This is a well written book by an expert in his field. Few British Army officers have as much practical experience of conflict as Jonathon Riley. He draws on these personal experiences, his wide knowledge of military history and his sharp intellect to great effect. I commend this book to both the serious student of the military art and also to the general reader." – General Sir Richard Dannatt,  "'This work is incisive in both why the battles are decisive and in the description of them with excellent accompanying maps.'" – The Bulletin for the Military Historical Society,
Do you really believe that 51% would be acceptable for a Jewish state?  If Israel ever got to 49% non Jewish it would very quickly cease to be a Jewish state and its unlikely anything could be done to reverse it at that point.  But you're continuing to skirt my question and tell me if you agree with European nationalists when it comes to whether or not their country should try to maintain its ethnic make up.
Steps on how to enable developer mode on your Xbox One  How to sideload Retrix and use it  The Xbox One now has a port of LibRetro, called Retrix. Thanks to the hard work of @Absestos , they've ported some of the LibRetro cores to UWP, which both Windows 10 and Xbox One users can use. You can currently emulate games from a wide range of systems, like the NES, SNES, GBA, Sega Genesis, PlayStation 1, with even more additions planned in the future, like N64 and Dreamcast. Retrix also allows for 2 player support, as well as savestates. The project is still early in development, but has come a long way in a short amount of time.The caveat to being able to access this, is that users will need a Developer Account, for their Xbox One. The process is simple, but requires $19.99 to activate, permanently. You then receive 3 slots to register any accounts to. You can do that by followingI personally tried out the emulator myself, using the following games.Super Mario World 2: Yoshi's Island: Works fullspeed, but crashes at randomContra III: Runs well, but experiences slowdown during explosionsSecret of Mana: Works fullspeedSuper Mario World: Works fullspeedAll GameBoy and GameBoy Color games crashed the program.Sonic Advance 3: Runs fullspeed.Pokemon Fire Red: Does not boot.Castlevania: Aria of Sorrow: Runs fullspeed.Fire Emblem: Sacred Stones: Runs fullspeed.All attempted titles besides Sonic Chaos resulted in a black screen.Sonic 3: Runs fine except when you lose rings, which causes slowdownRoad Rash: Runs fine until you get hit, and the game has a runtime errorSonic CD: Works fullspeedShining Force CD: Works fullspeed1. Obtain a developer account.2. On your Xbox One, install the free "Dev Mode Activation" app from the Xbox store3. The Xbox will then give you a 6 digit code, on your computer, go to theand put the code in there.4. Your system will confirm the activation code, and prompt you to restart into Developer Mode1. After the above steps, the console will be in Developer Mode. You will then see your Xbox One's IP on the home menu.2. Type this IP into your browser, which will take you a hub page. You can upload the .APPX for Retrix here. It'll install to your Xbox, and you'll be good to go.3. PlayStation and Sega CD games require BIOS. You'll need these to play games from either of those systems.4. Get a USB with a roms folder on root, put any roms and BIOS files there.5. You're done! Select a given system from Retrix's menu, and load your rom, and it will boot.
By Dina Bass, Peter Burrows and Jonathan Erlichman  Bloomberg News  Microsoft's board is preparing to make Satya Nadella, the company's enterprise and cloud chief, chief executive officer and is discussing replacing Bill Gates as chairman, according to people briefed on the process.  One person the board is considering to take the place of co-founder Gates as chairman is former Symantec CEO, who is now Microsoft's lead independent director, John Thompson, said the people, who asked not to be identified because the process is private. Gates may still play an active role at the Redmond, Wash.-based company that he founded in 1975, depending on the wishes of the board and new CEO, said the people.  Nadella emerged as one of the stronger candidates to replace departing CEO Steve Ballmer weeks ago, people familiar with the search have said. The plans aren't finalized, said the people.  Thompson, who is heading the CEO search, wrote in a blog post last month that the board plans to complete a search for CEO in the "early part of 2014." He said the board started with more than 100 candidates and has since narrowed the list. Ballmer said last August that he planned to retire within a year.  Frank Shaw, a spokesman for Microsoft, declined to comment.  The company also considered internal candidates including Executive Vice President Tony Bates and Chief Operating Officer Kevin Turner. External candidates have included former Nokia Oyj CEO Stephen Elop, Ford Motor Co. CEO Alan Mulally, Qualcomm Inc. CEO-elect Steve Mollenkopf and Ericsson AB CEO Hans Vestberg, people familiar with the search have said.  Some CEO candidates have declined to be considered or dropped out of the running. Vestberg has said he plans to stay at Ericsson. Mulally took himself out of the running earlier this month.  Nadella joined Microsoft in 1992 and has had leadership roles in cloud services, server software, Internet search and business applications.
Busy, busy, busy!  The other day my daughter wanted to "help" me with one of my projects.  I love when my kids help me.  We were in the garage spray painting some wood.   I gave her a job of spray painting some tiny clothespins.  I ran inside to grab something, came back and squatted down to finish spray painting.  What I didn't know is my daughter had set her can of dark brown spray paint right under me (on accident).  I sat on the thing just enough for it to spray paint all over my rear.  Only me! I'm sure after that story you are inspired to go spray paint something.  Let's make some 2x4 stocking hanger/holders!   Grab a 2x4.  I cut mine in 7 inch pieces.  Sand those pieces. Grab a hook of some sort.  Mine is from Home Depot.  It cost me a whole .38 cents.   There are nicer screw in hooks (and more expensive) but this cheap one gets the job done.  The only thing I suggest is not getting one this long.  A shorter one will do the job.  I drilled the hole for the screw. Use some pliers to twist the screw in.  I couldn't find my pliers so I used this thingamajig. At this point your project should look something like this.... =- Add on one of these small craft finials from Lowes.  They just screw in the top of your 2x4. I took my project into the garage and spray painted it.  While I was waiting I ironed freezer paper onto burlap and printed the kids names out with my printer.  I'm in love with this font.  It's called I'm Bored :) Cut the burlap to fit on the face of your 2x4 piece and then use Cut Tacks Tachuelas.  I think it's hilarious they are called Tachuelas because when you reach your little fingers in the package it's like a bunch of little Dracula's biting you.  OK not so funny but I thought the name is appropriate.  Tachuelas are great.  You can push them in the wood a little and just use a hammer to complete the job. Last but not least use Gorilla Glue to secure the two pieces together.  You're done and your kids will be super happy! A wall in my house is dedicated to crates right now.  Not because I necessary want a wall of crates but I am storing them for an event.  As they have sat there the past moth I have found...Crates are so useful!  So many fun things to do with them.  They are great for Christmas decorations.  As you can tell by the picture below I use them to store stuff and my kids use them for their Lego's.  Building a crate is easy.  Here we go with Crate 101.... Grab a piece of wood.  If you are like me you have a ton in the garage.  If not go down to Home Depot and grab what you like.  The piece of wood in the picture below cost about $1.60ish. Decide what size you want your crate.  I'm going to build a 12x12" one.  Cut (6) 12 inch pieces.  Then cut 2 of those pieces in half lengthwise as shown in the picture below. You should now have (4) 12 inch pieces and (4) 6 inch pieces.  Grab you handy dandy air powered staple gun.   If you don't have one you can use nails and a hammer.  I have to admit...this little tool is a lot of fun ;) Staple the corners together to form a box. This above picture was so hard to take with my left hand!  Here is a pic of the started box...  Place your 6 inch pieces on the box you just built (the (2) 12 inch pieces we cut in half lengthwise). Finally staple or nail those babies on. Lately I have been using my crates for photo props but you can also use them for decoration.  Grab that crate you just made and paint it dark brown, sand it, make yourself a cute burlap wreath and this is what you get.... I'm not sure exactly how much this cost me to make total because I had all the supplies on hand but if I were to guess I would say about $3.00.  Can't beat that!
The baking bug has bit my sister, Dom, and me. Weekends when she is in town we take the ideas we've been collecting in our time apart and eagerly start cooking little confections that we turn around and feed to the wonderful people in our lives. It feels a little like we're the Stepford Wives when we put the aprons on (I have some adorable ones) but I happen to think it is a ton of fun to just get girly and bake like we mean it.  This weekend had us making Dipped Graham Cracker cookies and Teddy Graham Cupcakes. Both of which were super easy. Since her and I do this mostly for fun we rarely do our recipes from scratch. Eventually we might progress that way but with our time limited we want to make the most of everything and just buy box mixes. Both of these treats took so little time to make and are really easy to personalize.  Supplies for Dipped Graham Cracker Cookies:  1. Graham Crackers  2. Your choice of chocolate (we used milk and dark)  3. Sprinkles or marshmallows  4. Wax paper for drying  Supplies for Teddy Graham Cupcakes:  1. Teddy Graham cookies (we used two different flavors)  2. Cupcake mix (we used a new kind by Betty Crocker called Fun-da-Middles that has icing in the center)  3. Icing for the cupcakes  4. Don't forget backing cups for easy removal once cupcakes are cooked!  Dipped Graham Cracker Cookies  Steps for Dipped Graham Cracker Cookies:  1. Melt your chocolate in a microwave safe bowl. Alternatively you can melt your chocolate in a sauce pan if you are going to be making a lot of these. We heated it up for about a minute until it was nice and runny.  2. Break your graham crackers into smaller sections (or leave large for a bigger cookie) and dip it into the chocolate. Move it around a bit if needed to cover one end of the cracker.  3. Lay dipped pieces onto the wax paper in rows, leaving room between each. After you get a few dipped, go back and add your sprinkles. This will ensure your chocolate doesn't harden before you can add the sprinkles. We also used little marshmallows.  4. To quicken the hardening process we put our cookies on trays and set them in the fridge for ten minutes.  And you're done! So simple and yet it makes a fun snack that isn't too rich. It goes great with some milk too! I recommend that you keep your cookies refrigerated until you want to serve them as it will keep the chocolate from getting soft in room temp.  Teddy Graham Cupcakes  Steps for Teddy Graham Cupcakes:  1. Mix up your cupcake batter per the instructions on the box.  2. If you are using the Betty Crocker Fun-da-Middles mix then fill your baking cups 1/3 of the way full.  3. Knead the icing package about 20 times to soften it, then divide it among the cupcakes. About a tablespoon per cupcake should work. Make sure you put the icing in the middle. Once the icing has been added, cover with the remaining batter. Bake according to time listed on box.  4. Now it's time to decorate! We used whipped icing and covered it with chocolate sprinkles and marshmallows. Finally, add your Teddy Grahams!  With the lighter, whipped icing these yummy confections weren't too rich; just the right amount of sweet!  I am already thinking of ideas we can try for the next time she is in town. These projects have been some of my favorite. It is great way for us to spend time together and grow closer. Dom has the biggest sweet tooth I've seen in a human being and baking with her is just another connection between us. I treasure these moments.
The issue of the divorce bill promises to be one of the first sticking points in Brexit negotiations | Leon Neal/AFP via Getty Images UK could walk away without paying Brexit bill, ministers believe Senior Tory suggests Berlin is reminded that 'that we remitted one half of all German debt' in 1950s.  LONDON — Theresa May's government will go into Brexit negotiations believing the U.K. could legally walk away from the EU without paying a divorce bill, a Brexit minister signaled Monday.  David Jones, the number two in David Davis' Department for Exiting the European Union, backed the findings of a recent report which claimed the U.K. would not be liable for any financial contributions if it left the EU without a deal, during evidence to a committee of MPs Monday.  Meanwhile, a senior Conservative MP risked souring relations with a key EU negotiating partner by urging the government to "tactfully" remind European officials that the U.K. helped Germany waive half of its war debt in the 1950s.  Bill Cash, chair of the European Scrutiny Committee, said it would be a useful point to make given "Germany's extremely dominant role in the European Union" and insisted that "we really don't owe anything to the European Union."  The issue of the divorce bill promises to be one of the first sticking points in Brexit negotiations. EU and member state officials have suggested that the U.K.'s outstanding liabilities could be as high as €60 billion.  But in his evidence to the committee, Jones said a House of Lords report, published earlier this month, which concluded that leaving the EU without a deal would mean no legal obligation to pay any financial contribution at all, had been "extremely helpful."  "I'm sure that it's not gone unnoticed in Brussels and other European capitals for that matter," Jones said, signaling that it would be a "starting point" for the U.K.'s position on the legality of its financial liabilities to the EU. However, he conceded that there would be "a big political element to the discussion" of exit payments.  May has signaled that the U.K. would be prepared to pay an "appropriate contribution" to the EU budget to remain part of certain Europe-wide programs. Her government is determined to avoid a no-deal scenario, but Jones' comments indicate that the prospect of the U.K. walking away without paying anything — leaving a hole in the EU's budget — is seen as strengthening the U.K.'s negotiating hand.  Tim Barrow, the U.K.'s permanent representative to the EU, appearing alongside Jones, told the committee that his EU counterparts were looking at legal opinions that "offer a different interpretation" of the divorce bill liabilities.  Any large one-off payment to cover liabilities under the EU's existing financial framework, or to meet the U.K.'s share of EU pensions contributions, would not be considered acceptable by Euroskeptic Conservative MPs, a number of senior lawmakers have told POLITICO.  Cash, a prominent Euroskeptic, said European Commission chief negotiator Michel Barnier's suggestion of a €60 billion divorce payment had been "fairly extravagant."  Speaking during the committee hearing, of which he was chair, Cash said: "Has anybody pointed out to them, or would you make sure that they do understand, that we have been net contributors for many decades to the tune of what is now running at around £9 billion or £10 billion a year, that our accumulated liabilities are offset by the extent to which we have made these massive contributions.  "And perhaps also to bear in mind," he added, "that back in 1953 there was a thing called the London Debt Agreement, where Germany, for all its malfeasance during the Second World War, and its unprovoked aggression, found that in 1953, in circumstances which were quite remarkable, found that we remitted one half of all German debt."  The London Debt Agreement of 1953 cut by 50 percent Germany's debt liabilities still outstanding from the war reparations demanded following the 1919 Treaty of Versailles. The debt relief agreement, which included several other creditors including France and the U.S., helped kick-start the country's recovery after World War II.  Responding to Cash's comments, Jones said he was "not entirely sure how tactful one can be when one is mentioning the London Debt Agreement," joking that he would refer his EU negotiating partners to Cash.
Portland will not investigate allegations that former Mayor Sam Adams made sexually inappropriate comments and frequent attempts at drunk driving when he was mayor because the alleged conduct took place too long ago and Adams is no longer a city employee.  That information was disclosed in emails from the city attorney's office obtained by The Oregonian/OregonLive last week.  Adams' former executive assistant, Cevero Gonzalez, emailed Portland's commissioners on Nov. 2 alleging that the former mayor asked him uncomfortable questions such as when the last time he "got laid" was, what positions he preferred during sex and questions about male body parts.  Adams denied the allegations in a November text to The Oregonian/OregonLive and said that he would "gladly participate" in an investigation.  But Portland City Attorney Tracy Reeve told Gonzalez in a Nov. 9 email obtained by The Oregonian/OregonLive that too much time has passed for the city to investigate the allegations. The Portland Mercury first reported the city's decision to not investigate.  "Mr. Adams is no longer affiliated with the city," Reeve wrote in the email to Gonzalez. "Given this, and given the passage of time, it appears unlikely that there is any legal avenue now open to the city to address the concerns you raise."  In her email, Reeve invited Gonzalez to meet with city attorneys to discuss his concerns and what he actions he hopes the city will take.  "We want to make sure we are fully apprised of both your concerns and any thoughts or recommendations you may (have) for the city going forward," Reeve wrote.  Gonzalez declined to meet with city attorneys, asserting that by not further investigating the city chose to "reaffirm a response that victims of abuse are all too often provided: there is nothing more to be done."  "While I appreciate your offer to meet to discuss my concerns in greater detail, I have little confidence that any substantive, meaningful or necessary conversations will occur unless an outside party investigates this matter further," Gonzalez wrote to the city attorney.  Reeve told The Oregonian/OregonLive in an email Thursday that the conduct Gonzalez alleged would have violated city rules in place at the time and the accusations would have been investigated had they "been reported." Reeve noted that Gonzalez received training on the city's anti-discrimination and anti-harassment policies, "including his ability to make reports outside his own office if he didn't feel comfortable reporting to his supervisor."  Gonzalez told the city attorney in an email that he did report the behavior to his supervisors, Tom Miller and Jennifer Yocom, but they dismissed his concerns. Miller said in November that Gonzalez never told him about inappropriate behavior. Yocom could not be reached for comment Thursday evening.  Gonzales told the city attorney that he was "shocked and saddened" that his statement had gotten out to the public.  He said the email that he wrote to eight top city officials' public email addresses was "intended solely for review by city of Portland staff." Public employees' emails are public records unless there is a specific provision in the law, such as for records containing private medical information, that allows them to be kept confidential.  --Jessica Floum  jfloum@oregonian.com  503-221-8306
$149.00 Buy It Now Free Shipping  61 watching  watching |  37 sold  These are very high quality and made to be as close as possible to the original. They are printed on Orajet 4mil thick gloss rapid air release vinyl to prevent bubbles with a permanent adhesive backin...
AUGUST 31--In a confidential memo to fellow staffers, the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee's diversity director last year outlined "best practices" when dealing with the "radical" Black Lives Matter movement, including the avoidance of phrases like "all lives matter" and "black on black crime," which "anger BLM activists" and are "viewed as red herring attacks."  The November 2015 memo, authored by Troy Perry, notes that the document "should not be emailed or handed to anyone outside of the building. Please only give campaign staff these best practices in meetings or over the phone."  The Perry memo was posted late Tuesday evening to the WordPress blog of "Guccifer 2.0," the hacker who has taken credit for intrusions into the DCCC and Democratic National Committee computer systems.  Since writing the BLM memo, Perry (seen above) has left the DCCC for a job with Hillary Clinton's campaign.  Noting that presidential candidates "have struggled to respond to tactics" of BLM, Perry advised that House candidates and campaign staff "should be prepared."  To that end, Perry counseled that "If approached by BLM activists," staffers should meet with group members and listen to their concerns, but not "offer support for concrete policy positions." Perry recommended that Democrats "Be a Partner & Lead From Behind" since leary BLM members "don't want their movement co-opted by the Democratic Party."  On the topic of "Message," the memo declares, "Do not say 'all lives matter' nor mention 'black on black crime.'" These phrases, Perry wrote, "are all viewed as red herring attacks" and would prompt unwanted media attention and "only anger BLM activists." Perry concluded, "This is the worst response."  Perry suggested several talking points regarding BLM when dealing with media and activists. "A history of systemic racism continues to confront the daily lives of African-Americans," he wrote. "The country must look for ways to address this legacy" and make sure that African-Americans are "treated with fairness and dignity." (2 pages)
Former Army sergeant who became a millionaire supplying hundreds of illegal firearms to criminals facing another life sentence for carrying on the business from his prison cell  Ex-Royal Artillery sergeant Paul Alexander served in the Army for 20 years  Set up arms dealing business and lived in luxury home in Essex  Originally arrested in 2008 after shooting of Rhys Jones in Liverpool  Schoolboy shot by gang member using weapons Alexander supplied   Jailed indefinitely for making 'assassin kits' and weapons linked to 28 crimes  Police believe his guns used in hundreds of robberies and killings  Security at HMP Swaleside so 'lax' that he could run racket from cell  Mobile phones available to convicts and he was allowed gun magazines  Mastermind: Former Army sergeant Paul Alexander, 58, who became a millionaire supplying hundreds of illegal firearms to criminals is facing another life sentence for continuing the business from prison  A former Army sergeant who became a millionaire supplying hundreds of illegal firearms to criminals is facing another life sentence for continuing the business from his prison cell.  Paul Alexander, 58, masterminded the operation from his cell at HMP Swaleside in Kent for 10 months with the help of fellow inmates, friends and family, including his wife and stepdaughter.  Alexander, who served his country for 20 years with the Royal Artillery, was already part way through a life sentence after he was caught selling 'assassin kits' - black plastic briefcases containing a handgun, magazine, cartridges and silencer - to gangs for £1,500 a time.  Police believe the guns Alexander supplied have been used in hundreds of robberies and killings.  His DNA was found on weapons supplied to the Croxteth Crew, who shot dead 11-year-old Liverpool schoolboy Rhys Jones in August 2007.  His fingerprints were also found on weapons used in another murder and four attempted murders. Links to guns provided by Alexander were further found in gangland shootings in Manchester, Birmingham, Nottingham, Derby and Luton.  Remarkably, Alexander, who prior to his arrest had lived a life of luxury in a £2.5m farmhouse complete with tennis courts and swimming pool set in four acres in the village of Bardfield Saling, Essex , was still allowed access to gun magazines in prison.  A list of suppliers names and addresses was also found in his cell.  Prosecutor Victor Temple QC told Woolwich Crown Court that Alexander picked up where he left off when he met 'right-hand man' Carl Gordon, 27, who was serving life for murder, in Swaleside, in 2011.  The pair took advantage of the 'lax' security systems in place at the category B prison, which Skull Cracker Michael Wheatley escaped from last month, to smuggle in phones so they could contact arms suppliers.  Accomplice: Alexander met 'right-hand man' Carl Gordon (left), 27, in prison, while wife Caroline Hunter-Mann-Purdy (right) was also involved in the scheme   The weapons, which are not illegal to buy if they do not fire, were then converted into deadly firearms.  The prosecutor said: 'Alexander was the overall organiser and ringleader. He coordinated the selling of firearms from his prison cell using the illegally acquired mobile phones.  'He used his wife and stepdaughter to communicate with others involved and used the family address as a base.  'All the defendants, particularly Alexander, knew that the firearms were going to end up in the hands of criminals who would not hesitate to use them for the purpose of violent crime, to rob, to maim, to endanger life.'  During a previous hearing, Mr Temple had said that Alexander had 'expertise' in weapons following his time in the Army.   The court heard the workshop used to covert the antique.44 calibre guns into firing weapons has never been found.  Involved: Alexander's step-daughter Lullahbelle Purdy, 26, (left) admitted money laundering funds from the racket, and Gordon's girlfriend Sherika Abbot-Holder, 27, (right) was convicted of conspiring to supply firearms   Gang: Leon Brown, 31, (left) admitted conspiring to transfer ammunition and David Joseph, 28, (right) admitted conspiring to supply firearms with intent to danger life   Letters to his wife Caroline Hunter-Mann-Purdy, 64, showed how heavily she was involved in his activities, the court heard.  Gordon's role was 'instrumental' in finding customers and establishing safe houses where the guns and ammunition could be stored, the court was told.   James Scobie QC, representing Alexander, said he pleaded guilty to conspiring to supply firearms with intent to endanger life in the 'full knowledge they could end up in the wrong hands.'  But he said Gordon, 27 was just as important to the racket at Alexander
Today we announce Trelby. This post documents how it came about, from my perspective.  The Backstory  Around mid-2011, when I decided to make a film, I went around searching for a simple, free, multiplatform screenwriting software. Note the three adjectives.  As an Ubuntu user, I needed something multiplatform. I did not want to switch my OS just to write a screenplay.  I needed a program that would be fast and easy to use. Hey, I like bells and whistles as much as the next person, but a screenwriter also needs to get out of your way and let you write.  And I'm an free software enthusiast. I like the freedom of being able to tinker with my software, of not having to wait for the BIGCORP, INC overlords to deign my feature request worthy of attention.  The Past  So, I went around on a google hunt. And the software that came the closest? Celtx.  Celtx is pretty good. It is multiplatform. It's free, and it has a lot of bells and whistles.  It's good enough that I wrote my first film with it.  But celtx was never simple. It had quirks. It did not look right. It provided limited configurablily of the interface. It called itself open source, but the build-sauce was difficult, and you needed to jump through hoops to work on it. It was tied to the company's services. PDF functionality wasn't built into the software! It was on a remote server, so you had to have an internet connection to generate a PDF.. I never understood that! And I could not disable the distracting bottom bar, that always showed the latest news update and things.  And it grew slooowww. Longer screenplays would start crawling. The editor would update in jerks, like you were magically typing words, and not letters. Granted I use a netbook, but a screenwriter is just a text editor! It should not require a supercomputer to run properly.  Being a little disappointed with this option, I searched for others.  There were none. Final Draft seemed to be the "standard" but it cost a lot. (And I mean a LOT).  The search did lead me to many tiny little gems. The most memorable one was called Pago. A vim script, that modified vim into a screenwriter. I now had fast and multiplatform. But not simple. Pago only had the (limited) intelligence to format the text to screenplay style, but that was it. However, it had one thing over Celtx - simple offline PDF generation. And I had settled on Pago for my then screenwriting needs.  So I forked a project on Github, and created a Pago repository. And while I was on github.. why not search for "screenwriting". With the thousands of project on there, perhaps there would be some other Pago like tiny solutions.  And so I discovered Blyte. "Chanced" might be a better word. Talk about hitting gold.  Years ago Osku Salerma had entered the fray of screenwriting software, creating a very well written piece of free, simple, multiplatform software. But it's revenue stream did not justify the time spent on it, and it was killed. Thankfully, it was made open. Osku created the github repository, and pushed the code in. This code has since been in hibernation.  Blyte had not show up on my extensive google searches. I suspect it hadn't in Kent Tessman's searches either, who grew tired of the incumbent playing field as well, and set out to create Fade In Pro, which is multiplatform and simple, but not free!  The Present  In October, I started working on Blyte. It was written in python! I installed the wxpython libraries, and ran the program, wondering how a five year old codebase would've aged.  (beat)  It worked! the colors looked odd, the interface seemed a little clunky, and the ancient widget library did not look great on Ubuntu.  But it ran without issues. And it was good. It had full PDF support (including font embedding). It was lightning fast. It was configurable. It had a tiny little fancy features too.  And the big three-adjective hole in free software was filled. I got in touch with Osku, who had not looked at Blyte in years, but enthusiastically agreed to take up maintaining Blyte's modern fork: Trelby. (it took a while to settle on a name!)  The Future  Trelby is polished Blyte, with many (many!) additional features, a clean uncluttered interface,
This intriguing documentary gives an insight into Colombia's most notorious cocaine baron. For the first time, Pablo Escobar's family have allowed exclusive access to more than 500 hours of home movies from relations, friends, and Escobar himself. The archive traces his extraordinary transformation from a petty car thief into the richest and most feared man in the world.  Comments  comments
The Atlanta Falcons are proud of the new Mercedes-Benz Stadium, but it looks like the facility may have a crowd-flow issue.  The stadium was used during the opening week of college football for the Chick-fil-A Kickoff Games. Alabama and Florida State squared off Saturday night with Tennessee and Georgia Tech playing Monday night.  Both games were exciting, but fans reported an issue when trying to leave the stadium following Monday night's contest. Many fans who were in attendance and struggled to leave took to Twitter to voice their concerns and disappointment, via Reddit Twitter account:  It's scary bad getting out and they weren't letting anyone use the escalators. pic.twitter.com/wBhAq4xo0O — Cody Fortune (@CodyFortune) September 5, 2017  Getting out of #MBStadium was a damn nightmare, took me 30 min going down a myriad of stairs to squueze out #TENNvsGT — Neil (@RealNeilB) September 5, 2017  The game on the field is one thing, but the last thing anyone wants is an injury or incident while attending a sporting event. Fan safety is a chief concern, and it looks like the stadium staff will need to address the procedures for exiting smoothly.
An unidentified Brazilian woman is being sued by her husband for allegedly trying to kill him, reports the UK Mirror. And what was the woman's weapon of mass destruction? Her poisonous vagina!  SEE ALSO: Do You Fear Online Dating?  According to court documents, the woman actually painted a poisonous substance on to her vagina and lured her unsuspecting husband to bed. She then asked him to perform oral sex on her.  The man, who is also unidentified, was reportedly more than willing to oblige his seemingly sex-fueled wife, but when he began to perform his husbandly duties, he noticed an unfamiliar odor emanating from her privates.  The man reportedly became so concerned about the strange smell — fearing that there was something medically wrong with his wife — that he insisted she accompany him to the nearest hospital to be examined by a physician.  After the pair arrived at a Sao Jose do Rito Preto hospital, the woman was put through a series of tests in order to find the root of the foreign odor. The wife's ruse was reportedly discovered when doctors detected the poison and it was revealed the woman had in fact concocted a plan to orally poison her hubby with her vagina.  Smh!  Also On News One:
Downton Abbey doesn't return for its third season until next year for U.S. television audiences, but executive producer Rebecca Eaton is revealing some big plot points for the British series -- including a major character's death.  "Somebody will be born, and somebody will die, somebody pretty key in the cast, unfortunately not going to make it. It's the 1920s now," Eaton told the Orlando Sentinel.   A big death is not a surprise for viewers of Julian Fellowes' Downton Abbey. In the first season, Kemal Pamuk made a splash with his death at Downton Abbey and last season, former footman William passed away after being injured in the war.   In the new season, viewers can also expect a wedding. "Matthew and Mary do get married," she revealed.   The arrival of Shirley MacLaine as Cora's mother will be significant for the drama. "There are some wonderful scenes between Maggie and Shirley MacLaine," said Eaton, "Shirley MacLaine being as ditsy as ever."   She continued: "And Maggie barely restraining her sneer in having to deal with this American. Maggie Smith is a handful, it's true. She's very difficult. She knows her worth and she's tricky on the set, but she delivers when the time comes."   Downton Abbey returns for season 3 in the U.S. in January 2013 on PBS.
On Friday, a Supreme Court of Nova Scotia judge struck down a law that allowed people who believed they were being "cyberbullied" to apply for legal protections. But in striking down the law, in favor of constitutional rights, the judge also returned the province to its previous void of legal protections for people experiencing online abuse.  The Cyber-safety Act was passed in the wake of the highly-publicized death of Rehtaeh Parsons with the goal of offering protection in severe cases like hers. The 17-year-old attempted suicide and later died after she was relentlessly harassed by her peers, who circulated a photo she alleged showed her being raped.  But the Cyber-safety Act's definition of "cyberbullying" — essentially, the repeated use of technology to cause harm to another person's well-being — has drawn criticism for being too broad.  That criticism became abundantly apparent in the case of two feuding businessmen: Robert Snell tweeted and blogged snide remarks that Giles Crouch believed were aimed at him. In one case, after the two men saw each other in the street, Snell tweeted, "You see someone and want to clothesline them … That is normal, right?" Crouch applied for and obtained a Cyber Protection Order against Snell under the Cyber-safety Act, but that order was voided today by Supreme Court of Nova Scotia justice Glen McDougall.  Related: Rehtaeh Parsons' Death Inspired a Cyberbullying Law in Canada — But Does It Hurt Free Speech?  The judge sided with lawyer David Fraser, who argued the act infringed on two sections of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Fraser argued the definition of "cyberbullying" cast a broad net and violated section 2 (b), which guarantees freedom of expression, and the judge agreed, calling the Act a "spectacular failure" in its breadth.  Fraser also pointed out to the court that legislation allowed complainants to apply for and receive a protection order without the alleged perpetrator of the harassment having any say in court. In his client's case, Snell wasn't aware Crouch had asked for such an order until a police officer served him with it, which the judge agreed violated section seven of the Charter, which guarantees the right to life, liberty and security of the person.  Fraser didn't ask the judge to throw out the law. Instead, he wanted the act amended, which would allow Nova Scotians to continue to apply for its protection.  When VICE News spoke to the lawyer in August, he said it was unlikely the court would throw out the Act in its entirety.  In an interview Friday, Fraser agreed that a void currently exists in protections for harassment, but said severe cases of online harassment have protections under existing laws. In Parsons' case, for example, there were criminal harassment and child pornography charges that could have been applied, but at least initially, law enforcement failed to apply them.  Related: Canada's New Cyberbullying Law Is Targeting Teen Sexting Gone Awry  "In severe cases of online harassment, I actually don't think that there's a void. We do have existing laws under the criminal code and civil remedies that are available in those extreme cases," Fraser said.  "The bigger question to ask, and I think the Cyber-safety Act actually created a little bit of a diversion from that: why were the existing laws not actually applied by the police and the prosecutors at the time?"  However, Fraser said that any legislation that addresses that existing gap has to properly define "cyberbullying." His definition would include intent to cause harm, and would take into account vulnerabilities of the complainant and their relationship to the alleged harasser.  Fraser added that any new "cyberbullying" legislation should include a proper defense, such as fair comment and the defense of truth — both valid defenses in civil defamation law.  "Do I think that there is a place for a law like a Cyber-safety Act that does provide relief for victims of cyberbullying that might not amount to criminal conduct, or that would allow you to deal with situations outside of the criminal justice system, which is a pretty blunt instrument, I do."  Follow Hilary Beaumont on Twitter: @hilarybeaumont
From TheKolWiki  Been away from the Kingdom for a while and wanted to quickly get up to speed with the most important changes? This page lists changes to the game that fulfill the intentionally vague criteria of "significant", such as changes to quests and things that a typical player might interact with on a frequent basis, as well as links to limited time content you missed.  Check the History of Loathing for a complete list of officially announced changes and Mr. Store for a list of previous Items of the Month.  January 2016  IOTM December 31: X-32-F snowman crate builds a snojo in the Big Mountains where players can fight increasingly difficult snowmen each day. PvP January 1: PvP this season is most optimal. Optimal fighters can earn a ROM of Optimality. Events January 3: Crimbo Town once again faded into the mists.  December 2015  November 2015  October 2015  September 2015  August 2015  IOTM August 3: Airplane charter: That 70s Volcano flies you to That 70s Volcano, filled with heavy metal, smooth velvet, and hot lava. Seasonal challenge path August 14: Community Service replaces lengthy council quests with simple 60-turn buttons. How will you become a more efficient volunteer? Pasta revamp August 11: Three new pasta dishes are added, based on ingredients found in The Hidden City. Zone changes August 18: The Nemesis Cave has been overhauled. August 25: The Barrel Full of Barrels has been crushed by a new, slightly different Barrel Full of Barrels, with 100% more animation.  July 2015  June 2015  May 2015  IOTM April 30: The portable Mayo Clinic is your one-stop Workshed shop for all your mayonnaise-related healthcare needs. PvP May 1: Bear Season in PvP encourages challengers to get in touch with their ursine side. Players can earn Essence of Bear for their achievements. Seasonal challenge path May 14 One Crazy Random Summer gives monsters dozens of new and unpredictable personality traits. Minor changes May 13: Combat items now have blue text explaining their effects.  April 2015  IOTM March 31: Airplane charter: Dinseylandfill allows you to travel to Dinseylandfill, the Kingdom's stinkiest and most depressing theme park. New stuff April 21: Doc Galaktik is offering a new quest, which takes place in The Overgrown Lot, a new low-level zone on the Wrong Side of the Tracks.  March 2015  IOTM March 2: The Crown of Ed the Undying improves Ed's connections with his servants and Ka-dealing jackals, and can also be decorated with Nemes (not pronounced "nay-mays") to adjusts its enchantments. PvP March 1: This Season's PvP is all about drinking, and adventurers can win a tip to sunny Kokomo.  February 2015  IOTM February 2: The bottle of lovebug pheromones unlocks the ability to summon lovebugs in combat and attract various bugs that give you free stuff after combat. Seasonal challenge path February 14: Actually Ed the Undying: If you've ever wanted to play as Ed the Undying, now you can! Get revenge on yourself for stealing the Macguffin through the powers of ancient gods and curses and connections with The Underworld. Just be aware that he's hard to fix up and that he had his organs removed a long time ago. New stuff February 9: The Armory and Leggery now stocks utensils for the everyday spellcasters. February 24: The Skeleton Store opened up at The Market. In other news, The Meatsmith is now offering a simple quest involving said store. Minor Changes February 7: All NPC shops have migrated to a new, standardized interface. February 8: New regulations now require Spleen items to provide descriptions for quality and toxicity, and HP and MP Restorers to display the exact restoration amounts. February 26: Like his ten times more more successful brother, Uncle Bucks are now Free Pulls from Hagnk's.  January 2015  December 2014  November 2014  IOTM October 31: Fist Turkey, the spiritual successor of the Hand Turkey, does all kinds of things at the start of combat, fights enemies, and drops booze to celebrate its victory. Seasonal challenge path November 14: Picky forces you to take 11 skills and 3 familiars, and no more. PvP November 1: 'Tis the season for some Holiday Fun! Events October 31: This Halloween bought about suspiciously silent wandering Trick-or-Treaters. Silently. Interface November 12: The skill page is now more than just a few drop-down lists and text boxes (although the old layout is still available). Zone Changes November 7: The Naughty Sorceress is now familiar-less, so players no longer have any reason to take those five fam
more-in  Mincing no words, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Tuesday declared that as long as he was in power he would not allow any division of Maharashtra.  Though he did not mention Vidarbha, does the PM's declaration also put paid to the talk of the decades-old demand for carving out a separate state Vidarbha from Maharashtra? It has been the BJP's stand to favour smaller States even though in this campaign Vidarbha has remained a non-issue for all parties. Those in favour of a separate Vidarbha had received a shot in the arm recently with the BJP splitting with Sena.  Campaigning for the State assembly election, Mr. Modi asserted that the 'land of Shivaji' would not be broken by any one. Mr. Modi's comments come in the heat of the state elections campaigning with the other four major parties in the poll fray--the Congress, NCP, Shiv Sena and MNS-targeting him for allegedly plotting to dilute Mumbai's commercial status or separating it from Maharashtra.  Dismissing as "lies," the Congress' charges that the BJP would divide Maharashtra, Mr. Modi at an election rally in Dhule, said:"I assure you no force can divide Maharashtra, till I'm in (power) in Delhi. Without Mumbai, Maharashtra is incomplete," Mr. Modi said. If any state has the capability of driving the country's growth, it is Maharashtra, he said.  Stepping up the offensive against Mr. Modi, MNS chief Raj Thackeray had accused him of cultivating a "hidden agenda" of splitting Maharashtra. Senior NCP leader and former PWD minister Chhagan Bhujbal had also commented that Mr. Modi was turning out to be the "PM of Gujarat" and would soon convert Mumbai into Ahmedabad.  In its mouthpiece, the Saamna, the Shiv Sena on Tuesday had attacked the BJP for failing to raise issues close to the Marathi heart. "Why don't they talk of Marathi asmita or a unified Maharashtra? the Sena asked.  While the two Senas have been opposed to any split of Maharashtra, in context of a separate Vidarbha, at the height of the debate on creation of the state of Telangana out of Andhra Pradesh, the then union minister and NCP supremo Sharad Pawar had said his party had no objection to Vidarbha.
Today is the 100 year commemoration day of the Armenian Genocide. To celebrate my Armenian heritage, I've re-created my grandma's Armenian hummus – our family favorite. And by family, I mean me and over 70 of my relatives.  A hundred years ago today, at the height of the Armenian Genocide, many of my great-grandparents and their parents lost their lives. Ever since then, Armenians have spread all over the world, and Armenia itself is now a small, landlocked third world country. Part of my goal with this blog is to preserve and hopefully immortalize part of my culture – the food.  Food is a huge part of any culture, and that's especially true for us Middle Easterners. We love our spices, flavors, and herbs. Every dish is made from a recipe that has been passed down. You'd be hard-pressed to find one that doesn't require a trip to a Middle Eastern market, but it's always worth it.  My next step, other than adding more Armenian recipes here from time to time, is to document my family's history with audio recordings. I've lately done some interviews with my mom and asked her about what life was like growing up in Armenia. I plan to do the same with my grandma and dad. That way, a part of the legacy of the Armenian people will live on, even hundreds of years after those who set out to annihilate our race attempted to do so.  "We are few, but we are loud. We have struggled, but we are proud."  Oh, and we love hummus.  5.0 from 1 reviews Grandma's Armenian Hummus Print Prep time 20 mins Total time 20 mins Author: StrawmarySmith Ingredients 1 can garbanzo beans (chickpeas) (I used no-salt-added)  4 garlic cloves, peeled  1 tbsp sesame tahini  1 tsp vegetable oil  2 tbsp lemon juice (from 1 medium lemon)  ⅛ tsp fine salt  pinch of cumin, plus more for topping (optional)  crushed red pepper flakes (optional)  extra virgin olive oil (optional)  snipped fresh parsley (optional)  kalamata olive (optional) Instructions Strain garbanzo beans and rinse thoroughly with cold water for 20 seconds. No need to peel. Fill food processor with beans, garlic, tahini, vegetable oil, and 1 tbsp water. Turn on processor and leave for 15 minutes. Then add lemon, salt, and cumin. Turn on for another 5 minutes. Add salt to taste and pulse to combine. Remove to a small plate or bowl. Using the back of a spoon, spread hummus evenly and create grooves for design. If desired, sprinkle with cumin and red pepper, and drizzle with olive oil. Decorate with olives, parsley, or both. Notes If hummus is too thick, add vegetable oil or olive oil by the teaspoon until you reach desired consistency.   This hummus can be made ahead and refrigerated up to 3 days, or frozen up to 3 months. Add garnish and olive oil topping just before you are ready to serve. 3.4.3177  Use more lemon with Pineapple Shrimp Couscous Skillet and Mango Avocado Salad
Panhandling Guide No.13 (2002) by Michael S. Scott  The Problem of Panhandling  This guide addresses the problem of panhandling.† It also covers nearly equivalent conduct in which, in exchange for donations, people perform nominal labor such as squeegeeing (cleaning) the windshields of cars stopped in traffic, holding car doors open, saving parking spaces, guarding parked cars, buying subway tokens, and carrying luggage or groceries.  The guide begins by describing the panhandling problem and reviewing factors that contribute to it. It then identifies a series of questions that might help you in analyzing your local problem. Finally, it reviews responses to the problem, and what is known about those responses from evaluative research and police practice.  Generally, there are two types of panhandling: passive and aggressive. Passive panhandling is soliciting without threat or menace, often without any words exchanged at all—just a cup or a hand held out. Aggressive panhandling is soliciting coercively, with actual or implied threats, or menacing actions. If a panhandler uses physical force or extremely aggressive actions, the panhandling may constitute robbery.  Isolated incidents of passive panhandling are usually a low police priority.1 In many jurisdictions, panhandling is not even illegal. Even where it is illegal, police usually tolerate passive panhandling, for both legal and practical reasons.2 Courts in some jurisdictions have ruled that passive panhandling is constitutionally protected activity. Police can reasonably conclude that, absent citizen complaints, their time is better spent addressing more serious problems. Whether panhandling and other forms of street disorder cause or contribute to more serious crime—the broken windows thesis—is hotly debated, but the debate is as yet unsettled.3 Panhandling becomes a higher police priority when it becomes aggressive or so pervasive that its cumulative effect, even when done passively, is to make passersby apprehensive.4 Panhandling is of greater concern to merchants who worry that their customers will be discouraged from patronizing their business. Merchants are most likely to call police when panhandling disrupts their commerce.5,†  Police must also be concerned with the welfare of panhandlers who are vulnerable to physical and verbal assault by other panhandlers, street robbers†† or passersby who react violently to being panhandled.6 Panhandlers often claim certain spots as their own territory, and disputes and fights over territory are not uncommon.7  Broadly speaking, public policy perspectives on panhandling are of two types—the sympathetic view and the unsympathetic view. The sympathetic view, commonly but not unanimously held by civil libertarians and homeless advocates, is that panhandling is essential to destitute people's survival, and should not be regulated by police.8 Some even view panhandling as a poignant expression of the plight of the needy, and an opportunity for the more fortunate to help.9 The unsympathetic view is that panhandling is a blight that contributes to further community disorder and crime, as well as to panhandlers' degradation and deterioration as their underlying problems go unaddressed.10 Those holding this view believe panhandling should be heavily regulated by police.  People's opinions about panhandling are rooted in deeply held beliefs about individual liberty, public order and social  responsibility. Their opinions are also shaped by their actual exposure to panhandling—the more people are panhandled, the less sympathetic they are toward panhandlers.11 While begging is discouraged on most philosophical grounds and by most major religions, many people feel torn about whether to give money to panhandlers.12 Some people tolerate all sorts of street disorder, while others are genuinely frightened by it. This tension between opposing viewpoints will undoubtedly always exist. This guide takes a more neutral stance: without passing judgment on the degree of sympathy owed to panhandlers, it recognizes that police will always be under some pressure to control panhandling, and that there are effective and fair ways to do so.  Related Problems  Panhandling and its variants are only one form of disorderly street conduct and street crime about which police are  concerned. Other forms—not directly addressed in this guide—include:  disorderly conduct of day laborers;  disorderly conduct of public inebriates (e.g., public intoxication, public drinking, public urination and defecation, harassment, intimidation, and passing out in public places);  disorderly conduct of transients/homeless (e.g., public camping, public urination and defecation, and sleeping on sidewalks and benches, and in public libraries);  disorderly youth in public places;  harassment (usually sexual) of female pedestrians;  pickpocketing;  purse snatchings;  robbery at automated teller machines (ATMs);  trash picking (for
In the early morning hours of April 10th, a kitchen fire spread through two buildings in Portsmouth, destroying the State Street Saloon and the apartments above and causing major damage to adjacent buildings.   Join the Seacoast Business Owners Group as we raise funds to support those displaced by the fire. The funds will be put into a savings account to be allocated according to need. These donations are tax deductible thanks to Art-Speak!   HUGE THANKS to all the businesses contributing to the raffle.   SPECIAL THANKS to Art-Speak who made this raffle possible by serving as the fiscal sponsor. The mission of Art-Speak is to enhance Portsmouth's community, which includes non profit arts, historical and cultural organizations, individual artists, citizens and businesses, as well as its economy through the arts and cultural programs and initiatives.   In addition to this work, Art-Speak supports the development of new non-profits by offering a platform to raise tax-exempt funds without official 501(c)(3) status.   #StateyStrong   Check out the amazing prizes below from 50 local businesses!! Donations make you eligible for any of the prizes below.
WASHINGTON -- Arkansas passed a religious freedom bill on Tuesday that is similar to an Indiana law that has faced national backlash for legalizing discrimination against lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people.  The bill cleared the Arkansas Legislature and now heads to the governor's desk, where it is expected to be signed. Like the Indiana law, the Arkansas legislation allows a person who feels his or her exercise of religion has been "substantially burdened" to cite that argument as a claim or defense in a private lawsuit. The legislation also grants corporations the right to religious freedom. This language is not in the federal Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA), and critics say it could be used to override existing anti-discrimination protections.  "The Arkansas and Indiana bills are virtually identical in terms of language and intent," said Sarah Warbelow, legal director at the Human Rights Campaign. "They place LGBT people, people of color, religious minorities, women and many more people at risk of discrimination."  Indiana Gov. Mike Pence (R) defended his state's law on Tuesday, calling for a legislative fix that would clarify that the law does not allow businesses to discriminate. Earlier in the week, Arkansas lawmakers also tried to head off concerns about that state's bill, approving language that says "the General Assembly finds that it is a compelling governmental interest to comply with federal civil rights laws."  However, according to Eunice Rho, advocacy and policy counsel at the ACLU, federal civil rights laws have no explicit protections for LGBT people, and this legislative finding -- while helpful -- is not part of the law. "If the Arkansas Legislature is serious about preventing discrimination, they need to write it into the actual code," she said.  "We would like to see both Indiana and Arkansas adopt language clarifying that the state RFRA cannot be used to undermine federal, state or local non-discrimination laws," Warbelow said.  During Monday's committee hearing, some lawmakers raised concerns about the bill being inconsistent with federal and state RFRA laws when it comes to protecting civil rights. Some proposed a simple solution: adding a non-discrimination disclaimer to the legislation.  "It's not a philosophical debate with me at this point. I think we're going well beyond the other states," said state Rep. Camille Bennett (D), who ultimately voted against the bill.  But the bill's author, state Rep. Bob Ballinger (R), said its language was staying put, and that it would be too confusing to try to define what constitutes discrimination.  "If that means that you can force somebody who has deeply held religious beliefs to engage in some activity that violates their deeply held religious beliefs, and that the state has the right to force them into doing it, I can't say that I do agree with that," he said.  Arkansas is about to enter the same minefield that Indiana has been trapped in since Pence signed his religious freedom bill last week. In Indiana, major companies like Twitter and the NCAA, as well as celebrities like Apple CEO Tim Cook and Miley Cyrus, have spoken out against the law.  In Arkansas, both Walmart and Acxiom, a big data company, have spoken out against the legislation. The Democratic mayor of Little Rock also warned Gov. Asa Hutchinson (R) on Tuesday that "any piece of legislation that is so divisive cannot possibly be good for the state of Arkansas and its people."  But Hutchinson appears unfazed by these concerns. Last week, he vowed that he would sign the legislation: "Arkansas is open for business, and we recognize and respect the diversity of our culture and economy," he said in a statement.
Screen shot from C-SPAN 2  Update: Sen. Rand Paul ended his old-school talking filibuster at around 12:30 a.m. Thursday morning, after nearly 13 hours standing on the floor. "I would try to go another 12 hours and try to break Strom Thurmond's record, but there are some limits to filibustering and I am going to have to go take care of one of those here," the Kentucky Republican said shortly before calling it quits.  Josh Voorhees Josh Voorhees is a Slate senior writer. He lives in northeast Ohio.  Sen. Dick Durbin was waiting in the wings to introduce a motion to end debate, meaning the Senate is all but certain to confirm John Brennan as the CIA director sometime Thursday. While Paul never got the Obama administration to state definitively that it doesn't have the right to "kill an American on American soil," he and a handful of his colleagues managed to dominate the news cycle for much of the day, bringing added attention to the president's drone policy.   Advertisement   At 12 hours and 52 minutes, Paul's (mostly) one-man show was the longest talking filibuster in recent history. Still, it was only a little more than halfway to the record of 24-plus hours set by Strom Thurmond while opposing the Civil Rights Act of 1957.  *** ***** ***  Update 8:51 p.m.: He's. Still. Going. We're now past the nine-hour mark.  *** ***** ***  Advertisement   Update 5:28 p.m.: Marco Rubio (R-Fla.), John Cornyn (R-Texas) and the awesomely named Saxby Chambliss (R-Ga.) have also made brief appearances to pose questions to Rand Paul to give him short breathers. Those questions are pretty much statements with a question-mark tacked on the end, but they nonetheless have helped the Kentucky Republican continue his filibuster of John Brennan's confirmation as CIA director.   Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid also came to the floor a few moments ago, although for the opposite reason. His half-hearted attempt to move on to the cloture vote was quickly blocked by Paul. With the filibuster now in its sixth hour, it looks like Paul has pushed Brennan's confirmation off by at least a day. (The all-knowing C-SPAN chyron now tells us, "Possible Tomorrow: Vote on Brennan Nomination.")  Paul says that he'll speak either until he can't speak any more or until the Obama administration states definitively that it doesn't have the right to "kill an American on American soil." In the end, Paul's effort aren't going to stop Brennan's confirmation, but they have nonetheless dominated a slow news day inside the Beltway, and thrust the administration's drone policy back into the headlines. You can watch here.  *** ***** ***  Advertisement   Update 4:02 p.m.: Add two more to the list of those senators helping Rand Paul stall: Kansas Republican Jerry Moran and Oregon Democrat Ron Wyden. Wyden plans to vote for Brennan's confirmation but just said on the floor that he shares some of Paul's concerns about the administration's targeted-killing policy. Regardless of Wyden's general support for Brennan, the filibuster has now gone bipartisan. We've now crossed the four-hour mark ...   *** ***** ***   Update 3:10 p.m.: Rand Paul is being careful not to officially yield the floor (something that would bring an end to his old-school filibuster), but he is allowing others to weigh in with short comments. First it was Utah's Mike Lee. About 10 minutes later, Texas Republican Ted Cruz arrived to get in on the action as well. Let's just say Paul's efforts aren't going unnoticed.   *** ***** ***  Advertisement   Update 3 p.m.: After speaking for more than three hours, Paul tapped out temporarily, tagging in his fellow Republican senator, Mike Lee of Utah, for a few remarks. As the C-SPAN chyron helpfully tells us, "Possible Today: Vote on Brennan Nomination." That's starting to look less likely now that Paul has found at least one other lawmaker to share the talking burden.  *** ***** ***  Original Post 1:36 p.m.: The Kentucky Republican took to the floor at about 11:45 a.m. and has shown no signs of stopping. He's promised to speak until he can't speak anymore, so we'll see how long he can keep this up. Paul has a few notes on hand to keep him mostly on topic (drones!), but appears largely to be improvising as he goes, leading to off-the-cuff remarks about everything from Kent State to the French Revolution. You can follow along over at C-SPAN, which has the live-feed.   Paul and his
BEIJING: In a country where anything from chopsticks to slippers can be designed to look like pandas, one Chinese energy company is going a step further by building 100 solar farms shaped like the bears along the route of the ambitious Belt and Road initiative.  Panda Green Energy Group has already connected one such 50-megawatt (MW) plant to the grid in the northern province of Shanxi, the first step in a public relations stunt that emphasises the cuddly side of the world's second largest economy.  Advertisement  Built with darker crystalline silicon and lighter-coloured thin film solar cells, the plant resembles a cartoon giant panda from the air.  The Hong Kong-based firm is currently in talks with Canada, Australia, Germany and Italy to launch more panda-shaped power stations.  The Belt and Road initiative is a plan to emulate the ancient Silk Road by opening new trade corridors across the globe using roads, power lines, ports and energy pipelines.  A 100-MW panda power plant would be expected to generate 3.2 billion kWh of energy over 25 years, according to the company, capable of supplying power to over 10,000 households annually.  Advertisement  Advertisement  Panda Green Energy is currently constructing its second panda power plant in Shanxi, which accounts for a quarter of China's coal reserves.  Utilisation of one panda solar power plant will save the equivalent of a total 1.06 million tonnes of coal and cut emissions of greenhouse gases by 2.74 million tonnes in 25 years, the company said.  The firm has been investing in and running solar power plants in China's major solar hubs such as Xinjiang and Qinghai province, as well as some solar projects in Britain.  Shanxi aims to install 12 gigawatts of solar capacity by 2020 versus 1.13 gigawatts installed in 2015.
EA has confirmed that EA Sports UFC will run at 1080p and render at 30 frames per second on the Playstation 4 and Xbox One.  In an interview with Gaming Bolt, EA Canada Creative Director, Brian Hayes, said that in previous projects, 60FPS "didn't have a hugely beneficial impact on gameplay." In fact, during focus-tests the team discovered that more players actually preferred the experience when the game ran at 30FPS with motion blur.  "As opposed to arbitrarily jumping back to 60 FPS for little discernible benefit, we decided to put those resources towards improving the visual presentation of the game in other ways," said Hayes.  This comes after some outcry from gamers about the resolution of next-gen games.  EA Sports UFC is currently expected to release on May 5, 2014 on Playstation 4 and Xbox One.  Thanks, IGN.
FIGURE 1  Integrating evidence-quality appraisal with an assessment of the anticipated balance between benefits and harms if a policy is conducted leads to designation of a policy as a strong recommendation, recommendation, option, or no recommendation. The evidence is discussed in more detail in a technical report that will follow in a later publication. RCT indicates randomized controlled trial; Rec, recommendation.
Returns and exchanges  I gladly accept returns, exchanges, and cancellations Contact me within: 5 days of delivery Ship items back within: 7 days of delivery Request a cancellation within: 24 hours of purchase The following items can't be returned or exchanged Because of the nature of these items, unless they arrive damaged or defective, I can't accept returns for: Custom or personalized orders  Items on sale Questions about your order? Please contact me if you have any problems with your order. Returns and exchange details  REFUNDS OR EXCHANGES:   I want you to be totally satisfied and happy with your purchase so if there are any problems, please contact me through Etsy within 5 days after receiving the item, so we can discuss a solution.   Refunds or exchanges will be made ONLY for non personalized items. The item needs to be returned in the same condition you received it, unused and in its original package within 15 days of the conversation agreement of a refund or exchange between the seller and customer.  -Customers are responsible for all shipping costs in the event of an exchange or refund.  Conditions of return:  Buyers are responsible for return shipping costs. If the item is not returned in its original condition, the buyer is responsible for any loss in value.  -Please note that each item is made to order especially for you, so additional costs may apply if a return or refund is required.   -NO EXCHANGES OR REFUNDS FOR CUSTOM OR PERSONALIZED ITEMS if the item was made as requested by the customer (Instructions requested in the invoice ) NO EXCEPTIONS.   CANCELLATIONS:  Orders cancellations are accepted within 24 hrs of the purchase or as long as the item is not already made.   -FOR CUSTOMERS OUTSIDE THE US:  International customers are responsible for all fees associated with shipping to their respective countries. Orders that are shipped to countries outside of the United States may be subject to import taxes, customs duties and fees levied by the destination country. The recipient of an international shipment may be subject to such import taxes, customs duties and fees, which are levied once a shipment reaches your country. Additional charges for customs clearance must be borne by the recipient; I have no control over these charges and cannot predict what they may be. Customs policies vary widely from country to country; you should contact your local customs office for further information. When customs clearance procedures are required, it can cause delays beyond the original delivery estimates.   CUSTOM CHARGES / IMPORT FEES   -I am sorry, I am not responsible for customs delays.   **Seller is not responsible for custom duties or import tariffs, taxes, or fees (or additional delays caused by customs.)   Buyers, please be aware that you *may* be required to pay these additional charges when the package reaches your country's border. You may wish to contact your local customs office for estimates of these charges and for further information.
Review: Southown's brand-new Burger Culture a welcome blast from the past  A half-pound ground chuck burger on a sesame seed bun from Burger Culture. A half-pound ground chuck burger on a sesame seed bun from Burger Culture. Photo: Mike Sutter /San Antonio Express-News  Hand-breaded onion rings from Burger Culture. Hand-breaded onion rings from Burger Culture. Photo: Mike Sutter /San Antonio Express-News  Half-pound bison burger with American cheese and rye whiskey sauce from Burger Culture. Half-pound bison burger with American cheese and rye whiskey sauce from Burger Culture. Photo: Mike Sutter /San Antonio Express-News  Rosemary shoestring fries from Burger Culture. Rosemary shoestring fries from Burger Culture. Photo: Mike Sutter /San Antonio Express-News  window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-5', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 5', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});  Sloppy Joe sandwich with grilled jalapeños on an onion roll from Burger Culture. Sloppy Joe sandwich with grilled jalapeños on an onion roll from Burger Culture. Photo: Mike Sutter /San Antonio Express-News  The new Burger Culture occupies the former Pig Stand on South Presa Street. The new Burger Culture occupies the former Pig Stand on South Presa Street. Photo: Mike Sutter /San Antonio Express-News  1960s psychedelia covers the walls at Burger Culture, including this mural of the Beatles. 1960s psychedelia covers the walls at Burger Culture, including this mural of the Beatles. Photo: Mike Sutter /San Antonio Express-News  Burger Culture features a new shaded patio. Burger Culture features a new shaded patio. Photo: Mike Sutter /San Antonio Express-News  window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-10', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 10', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});  Though simple in concept, some of San Antonio's best restaurants have made culinary masterpieces out of burgers.   See the burgers you can try at 13 of San Antonio's best restaurants. Though simple in concept, some of San Antonio's best restaurants have made culinary masterpieces out of burgers.   See the burgers you can try at 13 of San Antonio's best restaurants. Photo: Edmund Tijerina/San Antonio Express-News  Bohanan's Prime Steaks and Seafood 219 E. Houston St., (210) 472-2600  Half pound burger (lunch menu): With sharp cheddar, lettuce, heirloom tomato, chipotle mayo Bohanan's Prime Steaks and Seafood 219 E. Houston St., (210) 472-2600  Half pound burger (lunch menu): With sharp cheddar, lettuce, heirloom tomato, chipotle mayo Photo: Billy Calzada /San Antonio Express-News  Boiler House Texas Grill & Wine Garden 312 Peal Pkwy. at The Pearl, (210) 354-4644  Jacky Treehorn Burger (lunch menu): Foie gras peanut butter, green tomato habañero jam, applewood bacon, poblano cheese  The 'David Lee Roth' Krispy Kreme Burger (brunch menu): Custom-blend burger patty, caramelized onion, smoked bacon, gooey American cheese, fried egg, lemon chive aioli, warm maple syrup, powdered sugar  BH Foie Gras Kobe Burger (dinner menu): Seared foie gras, whiskey onions, cambazola cheese, tomato marmalade, truffle aioli, malted candied bacon less Boiler House Texas Grill & Wine Garden 312 Peal Pkwy. at The Pearl, (210) 354-4644  Jacky Treehorn Burger (lunch menu): Foie gras peanut butter, green tomato habañero jam, applewood bacon, poblano cheese  The ... more Photo: Mike Sutter /San Antonio Express-News  Boudro's On The Riverwalk 421 E. Commerce St., (210) 224-8484  Boudro's Burger (lunch menu): Half-pound mesquite-grilled black angus beef, white cheddar cheese, chile-pickled onions, ripe tomatoes, avocado salsa Boudro's On The Riverwalk 421 E. Commerce St., (210) 224-8484  Boudro's Burger (lunch menu): Half-pound mes
Pacific Explorer   overview specifications gallery  Pacific Explorer Specifications Weight: 2,000 kg empty Payload: 1000 kg max Length: 8.8m Width: 3.5m Height: 2.2m Cushion Height: 0.45m (hard structure clearance) Seating: 12 passengers Power Unit: Cummins ISB275 CRDI engine, 275hp at 2,500 rpm. This engine is strong, fuel efficient, compact, and reliable. It is lightweight and ideally suited for hovercraft use. Transmission: Gates Polychain GT toothed drive belts - quiet and efficient with a long operation life. Propulsion: Three blade alloy ducted CPP. Low revolutions and quiet with fully reversing pitch control. Lift Fan: High flow aerofoil section Carbon composite centrifugal fan. Flexible Skirt: Full flow Hypalon/nylon reinforced loop with anti-bounce web. Reinforced neoprene segments. Wave Height: 1.0m Speed: 35 knots Fuel Capacity: 240 litres diesel Fuel Consumption: 40 litres an hour average Noise Level: Cruise speed at 20m 78dBA 50m 70dBA 100m 64dBA 200m 58dBA All full report of noise levels for the Explorer hovercraft is available on request.
In January, Minnesota's top agriculture and environmental leaders gathered at a triumphant news conference to announce a $9 million federal grant for a novel project to help farmers protect streams and rivers from the chemicals that come off their land.  A one-year trial had been a resounding success, Agriculture Commissioner Dave Frederickson announced. The federal money, combined with another $11 million from the state, would finance a full-scale launch. It would make Minnesota a national leader in showing how farmers will step up to solve one of the country's most grievous environmental problems — agricultural water pollution.  But a growing chorus of critics is saying not so fast. Some say the project won't do enough to protect the water and that its effectiveness can't be measured. Others say it's not ready for prime time because its success with farmers so far has been spotty.  The surprisingly sharp discord that has erupted around the Water Quality Certification Program reflects a growing urgency about the best way to use $110 million a year in Legacy funding devoted to clean water. Even though the Legacy Amendment has 20 years of life left, many fear that Minnesota is running out of time to reverse a landscape-sized problem that was decades in the making.  And this particular investment "falls short of its promotion," said Steve Morse, executive director of the Minnesota Environmental Partnership, which lobbies on behalf of environmental groups. In a state where chemically intensive agriculture occupies about half the land, the effort is a waste of money because it can never achieve "the scale needed to correct the problem," he said.  Officials from the Minnesota Department of Agriculture say the program is a major step in on-farm conservation and water protection. It is unique because it uses a simple score to grade each farm as whole, and provides expert technical advice to help farmers design water-protection plans specific to each field.  Widespread resistance  Nothing will ever eliminate all agricultural water pollution, said assistant Agriculture Commissioner Matt Wohlman, "but I think we will see measurable results here in Minnesota."  But resistance to the effort is broad. In December, the state's Clean Water Council, which oversees Legacy money for clean water, refused to recommend the proposed increase in funding. Environmental groups are rallying against more taxpayer investment in a project without proven results. Now some key Republican legislators may put the brakes on.  "I don't think we are ready to go statewide," said Rep. Paul Torkelson, R-Hanska, a farmer who sits on the House environment committee and the Legacy Finance Committee.  The certification program was initiated with great fanfare nearly three years ago. Gov Mark Dayton stood with the head of the Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Secretary of Agriculture and other top officials to announce the first federal-state partnership in farm conservation. The ambitious strategy would give farmers a green seal of approval if they acted voluntarily to protect the water from fertilizer, soil erosion and other contamination. In return, they would be exempt from any new water-quality regulations — a "certainty" designed to woo farmers into signing up.  The idea was driven by a combination of political and fiscal realities that still stand. Farms are not covered by the federal Clean Water Act, the nation's main water pollution law, and regulating farmers faces political hurdles. At the same time, funding for long-standing farm conservation programs has been severely cut, and their financial incentives cannot compete with high commodity prices or federal subsidies that spur farmers to increase production.  Last year, with $3 million in Legacy funds and $3 million from the USDA, the state Agriculture Department started recruiting farmers in four watersheds. So far, just 30 farmers have succeeded in winning the green certification sign that they can post on their driveways, but some 260 more are in the process, officials say.  "It's somewhat difficult to attain," said Ken Schefers, a farmer near Paynesville who served on the program's advisory board, and was one of the first to sign up. He and his family raise a variety of crops and livestock, and he was already pretty water-conscious, he said. Even so, he had to conduct more soil tests and track his manure applications. He also added more grass buffers around his ditches and fields.  Mark Lefebvre, a specialist with the Stearns County Soil and Water Conservation District who works full-time for the certification program, said the scoring system, which rates farms from 1 to 10, is the best educational tool he's ever used in working with farmers.  "They can see their score on paper in black and white," he said.  Others say the scoring system, in practice, does little to protect the water. Kris Sigford, a water quality specialist with the Minnesota Center for Environmental Advocacy, said it does a poor job of accounting for the pesticides and nitrogen fertilizer lost through drainage systems that lie beneath a huge portion of the state's fields. That source alone makes up more than a third
The purpose of this survey is to determine how various bras fit different breast characteristics (e.g., shape, shallowness, etc.). There are two parts to this survey:  Part 1 (this survey) asks questions about the characteristics of you and your breasts. Answering these questions will allow others with similar breast characteristics to make an informed decision about whether a bra is likely to fit them. You will only need to complete this part once.  Part 2 (the next survey) asks you to answer questions about how your bras fit you based on a variety of characteristics. Please retake this survey for your different bras as many times as you wish.
Beneful Dry Dog Food  Good ingredients is what you'll find at the heart of our Incredibites® With Real Beef recipe. We take our #1 ingredient, real farm-raised beef, and blend it to perfection with whole grains and accents of vegetables.
Epic Games Night: in Space!  Friday 24th of May 2013 4pm - Midnight CSIT Building rooms N101, N102, N108, N109, N114, N115, N116 and N118  (CSIT Building is building #108 on ANU Maps) Facebook Event! Registering | Food | Sponsors | FAQ  What is it?  May 24, 4pm - Midnight, we will be taking over the lower level of CSIT for an awesome night of fun,  rage, and GAMES!  CSSA members get in for free, but sign-ups are welcome on the night for $5! So bring ALL your friends!!  Games! Here's a list of games you'll see on the night:  Super Smash Bros Brawl  Mario Kart  Starcraft 2  DotA 2  Tekken Tag Tournament 2 (and some other fighting  games)  games) Dance Central  FIFA  Halo  Teeworlds  Quake  Dominion (and some other boardgames)  Fruit Ninja  ... and more!  Most of these will have tournaments, so keep an eye out for tournament registrations coming out very soon!  And now I bet you're wondering about the 'in Space!' bit on the subject line. Well!  We're mixing it up a bit this time around, and have decided to dress up CSIT in spacey things!  If you want to get involved, maybe you can dress yourself up in spacey things too! A prize may be involved!  Or, you can help us make decorations in the coming week. Just drop into the CSSA clubroom later in the  week to see what's there!  Of course, volunteers are always a big help to us on the night. If you'd like to lend your arms, ears, eyes, and whatever else to us for the night, please fill out this form.  If you are on facebook, please RSVP here, and share with all your friends  Entry is $5 and open to general public.  ANU CSSA Members can enter for free.  You don't have to join ANU CSSA, but its included in the $5 Entry free, so we think you should.  We ask that everybody who attends signs in at the lobby. Their names will be entered into a competition to win a lucky door prize. It also helps us with security and get funding for future EGNs.   Frequently Asked Questions  1.I'm not a member of the cssa, can I come?  Yes. See Registering.  2. Can I bring my non-cssa friends?  Yes. See Registering.  . Feel free to bring everyone you know! :)  3. Whats the deal with food/snacks?  There will be snacks throughout the night.  There will be drinks on sale in the lobby.  We will be organising a pizza run during the night, please register your interest in the lobby before 5.30pm. See Catering for more details.  4. Can I enter in multiple competitions?  We please sign up for multiple competitions and let the organisers know, we will try and accommodate all requests to the best of our ability.   Catering/ Pizza  Pizza will be available to order on the night for a subsidised price of $5.  We'll be running 2 rounds of orders to make it easier for you to compete in tournaments.  Round 1 orders close at 5:30pm.  Round 2 orders close at 7:00pm.  And of course there will be drinks for sale, and free snacks and juice in the foyer!   Impact Comics  The Games Capital  Valve  Google  Revolution CD  Gametraders  Research School of Computer Science  Fenner Social Gaming  Jump to top of the page.
The Deep Interview  In this exciting special episode, Dark Journalist Daniel Liszt welcomes back Former Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Catherine Austin Fitts. Catherine is the President of The Solari Report, a quarterly journal and website that integrates economic trends with a larger geopolitical picture.  Ascent of the Black Budget Underworld  Catherine sees the forces vying for power in the 21st century as a combination of Black Budget underworld with its covert influence in drug running, money laundering and high finance, and the robotic, transhumanist corporate culture that is attempting to create a new kind of digital slavery.  In either case, the public civilization is only vaguely aware of the impact of these forces on their daily lives. In everyday living in modern society, an average person doesn't often get the opportunity to see the massive plan being brought to bear for the global dominance of a worldwide smartgrid capable of cataloging every person according to its harvesting algorithm.  Fascinating, informative, alarming and crucial, you don't want to miss this fascinating Dark Journalist episode!
Yesterday, while Minister Nene was doing his thing in parliament with all those EFF-student-stun-bombing backing vocals, I got a bit prickly when he started talking about "tax evasion" and "profit-shifting". There's a strong vilification narrative there, and I think that it's worth evaluating.  To be clear, of course I believe that there is a need to re-dress South Africa's past. We need transformation and equality and the re-balancing of privilege. I don't think that you'll find too many people disagreeing with that.  But this demand needs to be balanced against what is already happening.  So to illustrate that, let me give you some numbers.  Based on National Treasury's 2015 budget projections, here is a picture of who pays income tax out of South Africa's population of 53 million people:  Based on their income brackets, I've also done some splitting into classes:  Here is how much income tax is collected from each class:  And allow me to take those tax collections and relate them to the number of taxpayers in each class:  On the basis of personal income tax, the top 1% or so (the 800,000 people earning more than R500,000 per year) pay 61% of the total income tax bill.  And I just want to point out that, by almost any standard, this is an extraordinary burden to lay on such a small portion of the population.  If we compare South Africa to the United States:  Both countries pay taxes that equal about 25% of their annual GDP. But do you remember Mitt Romney and his "47% of Americans don't pay any income taxes" comment that caused such an uproar? Compare that to our 87% who don't pay income tax. And in 2010, the top 1% of taxpayers in the US contributed about 37% of the total income tax bill. Compare that to the 61% mentioned above.  And this is only part of the story.  The other side is what the government spends its money on. Because as I mentioned a few weeks' ago (in this post), there are some countries in the world that manage to collect plenty of income tax (almost 50% of their GDPs). And it seems that the reason they have such a willing tax base is because those States deliver good and reliable services to their people, both the taxpayers and the non-taxpayers alike.  So here is how the South African government spends its money (based on those same National Treasury 2015 budget projections):  But that's just a description of general government functions. Here is a breakdown of that spending by economic purpose:  Here is the issue:  In countries where lots of tax is collected, taxpayers get benefits in return for their taxes. Looking at the above breakdowns of government spending, where are the benefits for the actual taxpayers? For my money, there are very few. In general, you could say that the average taxpayer gets the most benefit from "general public services" and "defence, public order and safety" – which accounts for less than a fifth of government spending. And even then, it's not something that's especially tangible.  I guess what I'm trying to say is: most of the government budget is already "transformational". When young activists talk about privilege and needing to pay for it, the point is: it is already being paid for.  If we say that about 20% of tax money gets received back by taxpayers as benefits (in the form of safety, a police force, infrastructure, etc), then the other 80% is essentially punitive. In some ways, it is more like a fine that one pays for being privileged, or for not needing transformation. It gets handed over in return for no tangible benefits.  And that needs to be recognised, because  You cannot indefinitely fine the privileged for being privileged; If you do it for long enough, then the privileged will just take their privilege elsewhere; You will alienate your tax base if you're not offering real tangible benefits in return; and If you're relying on 1% of the population to be almost two thirds of your income tax base, then you had best get your spending in order. Because you are vulnerable, and they may leave.  A Post-Script Update  This post has been up for almost two days now, and I just wanted to clarify two points:  Yes, I know that there is more than just "Income Tax" in the government revenue plan. I have written about the other taxes here: How South African Non-Income Taxes Are Paid. Unfortunately, I am only one man with one blog – I can't write all the posts in one day! But I think you'll find that the rest of the fiscal plan is designed to support the re-distributive structure of the Income Tax, not undermine it. Secondly, I'm not trying
Matt Fryatt scored twice as Sheffield Wednesday thrashed Reading to earn their first victory of the season.  Fryatt opened the scoring after a pass from Michail Antonio, who made it 2-0 with a low curling shot from 20 yards.  Pavel Pogrebnyak pulled a goal back with a header, but a Sean Morrison own goal restored the hosts' two-goal lead.  Owls debutant Connor Wickham blasted in a fourth and then set up Fryatt to grab his second goal, before Reading's Adam Le Fondre converted a late penalty.  Media playback is not supported on this device Sheffield Wednesday boss Dave Jones  The victory takes Wednesday, who had started the day bottom of the Championship, up to 21st and out of the relegation zone, while Reading remain fifth after their third league defeat of the season.  Dave Jones's Wednesday side had been the only team in the Football League or Premier League not to have won a match, but that record looked like ending after 25 minutes when they moved two goals ahead.  A long ball by Kamil Zayatte was misjudged by Reading left-back Stephen Kelly and that allowed Antonio to pull the ball back to Fryatt for a simple finish for the opener.  The Owls doubled their advantage six minutes later as Antonio received the ball from Seyi Olofinjana on the right wing, cut inside and placed his shot past Reading goalkeeper Alex McCarthy.  Russian striker Pogrebnyak headed in Chris Gunter's cross to make it 2-1, but the hosts held a 3-1 half-time lead after Wickham's shot rebounded off McCarthy and hit Morrison with the ball going into his own net.  Wickham, who joined the Owls on loan from Sunderland on Friday, netted his first goal for his new club with a powerful finish after fine play on the wing from Antonio.  Fryatt then got the hosts' fifth after 62 minutes, lifting the ball over McCarthy after linking up with Wickham.  In injury time, Le Fondre scored a consolation spot-kick for his sixth goal of the season after Reda Johnson fouled Pogrebnyak in the penalty area.  Sheffield Wednesday manager Dave Jones:  "I feel it's the reward for the players for the hard work that they've been doing. We just needed to turn the draws into wins and everything that could go for us went for us and these are the days you've got to enjoy.  "It's been coming. All that frustration and bad luck came good. I can't fault the players and they should enjoy it, because on Monday we'll batter them for the mistakes they did make."  Reading manager Nigel Adkins:  "I thought we started well and played some good football, but goals changed the complexion of the game. We were good for the first 20 minutes and then Wednesday scored a goal against the run of play.  "The goals are shocking from our point of view and they changed the game. We did well in periods but in the end we just got thumped 5-2 away from home."
Voice actress Natsuko Kuwatani announced on her blog on Wednesday that she is taking time off from work to recover from a viral infection in her vocal cords. She explained that more time is needed for a complete recovery, so she is devoting herself to her ongoing treatment until then. As soon as she is back to normal, she will resume her blog again.  Kuwatani has been hosting the Yotteku~? radio program with Kana Ueda . However, Kaori Shimizu took Kuwatani's place as a "pinch hitter" during last week and this week's episodes.  Kuwatani was scheduled to reprise her role as Suiseiseki in the the new Rozen Maiden anime that will premiere in July. Her many other roles include Ai Mikami in The Future Diary and Ryōko Asakura in The Melancholy of Haruhi Suzumiya . She happened to replace Yuko Goto as F. Walsingham in Horizon in the Middle of Nowhere II when Goto was undergoing her own medical treatment for an autoimmune disease.  [Via Ota-Suke]
The vice presidential candidate is courting Bacolod City voters in a campaign stop with his wife, who traces her roots to Bago City  Published 8:00 AM, April 13, 2016  BACOLOD CITY, Philippines – Senator Ferdinand Marcos Jr is hoping to drum up support for his vice presidential bid in Negros Occidental, a known bailiwick of Liberal Party (LP) standard bearer Manuel Roxas II, as he campaigned in this city accompanied by his Negrense wife.  The vice presidential candidate was in the capital of Negros Occidental province on Tuesday, April 12, to meet with Bacolod Bishop Vicente Navarra and barangay leaders.  He also called on Negros Occidental Governor Alfredo Marañon Jr., a staunch supporter of Roxas, and Mayor Monico Puentevella at the Provincial Capitol and the People's House.  The province is a known bailiwick of Roxas, whose mother Judy Araneta-Roxas is from Bago City.  Marcos' wife, Louise Araneta-Marcos, also traces her roots to Bago City. She is also the second cousin of the administration candidate.  "Everyone here is Ilonggo by birth. I'm Ilonggo by choice because I married an Ilongga from Bago. I have a particularly close feeling for Bacolod and Negros," Marcos said.  He added that local candidates were friends of his, though he acknowledged that they are members of the LP, and that they have to work within the confines of the party line.  "They know my capabilities and my plans. That's how we are approaching different areas, and Negros is one of them. We feel we have support of all quarters," the senator said.  Asked if he could sway Marañon on his side, Marcos said that it was clear that the governor is with the majority, but did not dismiss the possibility.  "We've known each other for quite a long time. He knows me as a person. Maganda naman pagkakakilala niya sa akin. Whether or not [the governor will support me], we will continue to campaign," the senator said.  He added, "We'd like many people to join us in our campaign. And we'd be very pleased if all the leaders will also support and help us."  Marañon backing Robredo  While Marañon admitted that many Negrenses are also supporting Marcos' bid, he said that he is backing the candidacy of the LP's vice presidential bet, Camarines Sur Representative Leni Robredo.  "I'm for Leni...When I said I'm supporting a candidate, I will really support that candidate. I won't betray that support. If I don't like the candidate, I will tell them frankly that I don't like them and that I'm supporting somebody else," Marañon said.  The governor also complimented Marcos on how he handled himself during Sunday's vice presidential debate. The senator was the subject of attacks from his rivals over the ill-gotten wealth amassed by his family during the martial law years.  "I admire his patience," Marañon said.  Meetings, protests  Accompanied by his wife and son Zandro, Marcos also met with Bacolod Bishop Vicente Navarra at the Bishop's House during his visit to the city.  Navarra said that the meeting was "very cordial and [we exchanged] pleasantries," adding that they did not talk politics.  "We wish him all the best. I told him to keep cool and treat everybody as his friend. Maintain his desire to serve the people if ever he gets elected," Navarra said.  Meanwhile, about 50 members of activist groups Karapatan and Bayan held a picket at the Central Market, where Marcos met with vendors Tuesday morning. They also held a rally at Casa Orola at Rizal Street, where the senator met with members of BBM Volunteers in the afternoon.  Clarizza Dagatan, secretary-general of Karapatan-Negros, said that they were urging people not to give Marcos a chance to return to office.  "He has no remorse with the human rights abuses committed by his family during the Martial Law," she said.  Remembering Escalante  During the reign of Marcos' father, the late President Ferdinand Marcos, Negros was a province keen on ending the dictatorship when the sugar crisis erupted in the late 1970s. Sugar is the primary commodity of the Negros islands.  One of the biggest rallies in the locality led to a gruesome incident dubbed as the Escalante Massacre. Several protesters were gunned down by government forces who were later charged with various counts of murder and frustrated murder.  More than 40 security
These are 13 of several games recommended to us by Google Plus users this year and last, when we asked for oneshot recommendations for Halloween horror roleplaying. Not listed in any particular order. Enjoy!  (Miss your favorite? Let us know what, why and where in comments!)  Dead of Night  A rules light and fun horror movie genre emulation RPG. Easy to get started, the prep is just a couple of minutes and then you are up and running. Publisher says: Dead of Night is the roleplaying game of campfire tales, slasher movies and b-movie horror. It is a game of screaming victims, unstoppable killers and slavering monsters, where the horror movie clichés flow thicker than blood and the only victory is survival.  Okult When the characters return to Hometown they realize that they have repressed the memories of something. And that something has again cast its dark shadow over the town. Publisher says: Okult is a rules light GM-less horror storygame, best suited for three to four players. The players take the roles of people who are a little bit like themselves, returning to a town a little like the place where they themselves grew up.  Ten Candles  Publisher says: A storytelling game of tragic horror designed for one-shot sessions. It is played by the light of ten tea light candles which provide atmosphere, act as a countdown timer for the game, and allow you to literally burn your character sheet away as you play. Ten Candles is described as a «tragic horror» game rather than survival horror for one main reason: in Ten Candles there are no survivors.  Cthulhu Dark  Highly narrative, simple rules, elegant execution. Allows you to tell stories where your descending sanity is the focus. You always succeed, but there are degrees of success. Simple combat system: If you fight something, you die. Publisher says: Cthulhu Dark is a rules-light system for Lovecraft roleplaying. The rules are fun and incredibly minimal: they fit on one sheet of paper. You don't need a character sheet to play, so you can start playing after two minutes of prep.  Fright Night  Publisher says: Fright Night is a lightweight, easy to learn and quick to play tabletop role-playing game intended to evoke the feel of b-movies, slasher flicks, horror films, and even dark comedies. The players take on the role of typical, everyday people that somehow cross paths with a variety of malevolent entities that they must either defeat, escape from, or contain.   Or, die trying.  Train, Hell, M1944  Publisher says: This is a macabre scenario. It deals with themes of powerlessness, abuse and body horror. There is nothing fantastic in it. Its content is not pleasant and the outcome will, most likely, be unpleasant as well. Either that is your thing or it really isn't. WAR IS OVER The men who fought and nearly died for their country in what's come to be known as the Second World War are bound for William C. Borden General Hospital in Chickasha, Oklahoma, a grim warehouse for soldiers who don't fit the heroic narrative. (Log in to download)  Dread  Dread is an excellent system for horror oneshots. Conflict resolution is handled by pulling bricks from a Jenga tower, making every skill check hair-raising. Publisher says: Dread is a game of horror and hope. Those who play will participate in a mutual telling of an original macabre tale. The goal of Dread is to sustain the delicate atmosphere that invokes the hand quivering emotion that lends its name to the game. The thrill of a Dread game lies within the tension between desire and loss. You will take on the role of someone trapped in a story that is only as compelling as it is hostile—someone who will find themselves making decisions we hope never to face in real life.   ViewScream  Publisher says: ViewScream is a live-action game designed for play with video-chat software like Skype or Google Hangouts. Three to five players assume the roles of desperate people trapped in a world of high-tech horror. (…) . The characters are separated (…) — and they need to work as a team in order to survive. Players never refer to their characters in the third person; they remain in character the whole time. A typical game session lasts 60-90 minutes.  The Black Pram  Freeform, free download. Publisher says: Lars and Helene are fighting for their baby's life. Every night a dark figure with a black pram waits outside their house. It waits for them to finally come out and give him what he wants. It waits for them to give up. If you like movies such as Pan's Labyrinth and Sixth Sense, this is the game for you. Keywords are mood-driven, intense, creepy and player-centered.  
Jonathan Bernstein makes a catch he plausibly calls the best self-refuting argument ever. See, Diane Black, one of the House Republicans sponsoring a resolution complaining about President Obama's recent recess appointments, issued a press release with the following two lines:  I hope the House considers my resolution as soon as we return to Washington so we can send a message to President Obama.  And:  [The NLRB appointee] names were only put forward on Dec. 15, a mere two days before the Senate recessed for the holiday.  So ... the House wasn't in town and the Senate had recessed for the holiday, but it's an outrage to the Constitution that Obama made a recess appointment, and just as soon as Diane Black gets back into town from her non-recess and Republican leadership stops blocking anything from getting done, the House is going to register its outrage over this abuse. And, while Black claims that the recess appointments are "an affront to the Constitution ... [that] doesn't pass the smell test," in fact, as David Waldman notes, "the outrage fails the old 'show me in the Constitution where it says you can't do that' test," since the Constitution says nothing about how long a recess has to be for recess appointments to be made.  Diane Black says she wants to send a message to President Obama by passing a resolution complaining about him. Send your own message to the president, thanking him for taking this bold action to keep government functioning despite Republican obstruction.
Code:  XBow Trapper Ranger 15/5 Ranger/Rogue True Neutral Human Level Order 1. Rogue 6. Ranger 11. Ranger 16. Rogue 2. Ranger 7. Ranger 12. Ranger 17. Rogue 3. Ranger 8. Ranger 13. Ranger 18. Rogue 4. Ranger 9. Ranger 14. Ranger 19. Ranger 5. Ranger 10. Ranger 15. Ranger 20. Rogue Stats 32pt 34pt 36pt Tome Level Up ---- ---- ---- ---- -------- Strength 8 8 8 +5 4: INT Dexterity 16 16 16 +5 8: INT Constitution 14 15 16 +5 12: INT Intelligence 18 18 18 +5 16: INT Wisdom 8 8 8 +5 20: INT Charisma 8 8 8 +5 24: INT 28: INT Skills Rg Rn Rn Rn Rn Rn Rn Rn Rn Rn Rn Rn Rn Rn Rn Rg Rg Rg Rn Rg 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 ------------------------------------------------------------ Disable 4 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 23 Open Lo 4 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 23 Search 4 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 23 Spot 4 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 23 Bluff 4 5 5 4 5 23 Jump 4 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 23 Hide 4 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 23 Move Si 4 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 23 UMD 4 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 23 Concent 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 2 20 Diplo 4 4 4 4 4 20 Balance 4 ½ ½ 1 1 1 1 1 10 Tumble 4 4 Haggle 4 4 ------------------------------------------------------------ 52 11 11 12 12 12 12 13 13 13 13 14 14 14 14 17 17 17 15 18 Feats 1 : Insightful Reflexes 1 Human : Point Blank Shot 2 Ranger : Favored Enemy: Undead 3 : Rapid Reload 6 : Precision 6 Ranger : Favored Enemy: Construct 9 : Improved Critical: Ranged 11 Ranger : Favored Enemy: Ooze 12 : Dodge 15 : Mobility 18 : Shot on the Run 19 Ranger : Favored Enemy: Evil Outsider 21 Epic : Combat Archery 24 Epic : Overwhelming Critical 26 Destiny: Holy Strike 27 Epic : Blinding Speed 28 Destiny: Doubleshot 29 Destiny: Harbinger of Chaos 30 Epic : 30 Legend : Scion of: Arborea Spells Ranger Jump, Longstrider, Ram's Might Mass Camouflage, Protection from Energy Wild Instincts, Neutralize Poison Freedom of Movement, Mass Longstrider Leveling Guide Mec0 Arbalester; Hrp0 Agent of Good I; Hrp1 Strategic Combat Hrp1 Harper Enchantment; Hrp1 Awareness I, II Hrp1 Awareness III; Hrp0 Intelligence Hrp3 Strategic Combat; Mec1 Sharpshooter; Mec1 Lacerating Shots I Mec1 Lacerating Shots II, III; Mec1 Mechanics I; Mec1 Awareness I Mec1 Mechanics II; Mec1 Awareness II; Mec1 Mechanics III; Mec1 Awareness III DS0 Far Shot; DS1 Favored Defense I; DS1 Stealthy I, II DS1 Stealthy III; DS0 Sneak Attack; DS2 Melee/Range Power Boost I, II DS2 Melee/Range Power Boost III; DS2 Survivalist; DS0 Sniper Shot DS3 Aimed Shot; DS3 Favored Hunter I, II DS3 Favored Hunter III; DS3 Thrill of the Hunt I, II, III DS4 Killer I; DS4 Merciful Shot DS4 Leg Shot; DS4 Killer II; DS3 Survivalist DS4 Survivalist; DS5 Head Shot DS5 Improved Archer's Focus; DS5 Strikes Like Lightning Reset Deepwood Stalker Mechanic (none) Sharpshooter  Deepwood Stalker: Far Shot, Sneak Attack, Sniper Shot, Advanced Sneak Attack Favored Defense I, Stealthy III Faster Sneaking II, Melee/Range Power Boost III Thrill of the Hunt III, Favored Hunter III, Aimed Shot Killer I, Merciful Shot  Mec3 Intelligence; Mec3 Sharpshooter; Mec3 Use Magical Device I, II, III; (Bank 11 AP) Mec4 Sharpshooter; Mec4 Fletching I, II, III; Mec4 Leg Shot; Mec4 Intelligence; (Bank
The White House is blaming the Obama administration for leaving President Donald Trump without a proper hotel during this week's G20 summit.  Every top-shelf lodging was already booked by the time the Trump White House began making inquiries – but that, two White House officials say, is because their predecessors never booked rooms for an American delegation.  The G20's northern Germany summit was announced in February 2016, when Obama was still president and Trump was considered a long-shot hope to take the White House.  'Obama's people left everyone high and dry,' one current official said on Friday. 'They didn't care enough to make sure whoever was president would have a place to stay.'  German Chancellor Angela Merkel (right) has a swanky block of hotel rooms for this week's G20 summit in Hamburg, but President Donald Trump (left) was left staying in a government-owned guest house because the Obama administration never thought ahead and reserved rooms when the conference was announced in early 2016  The guest house of the Hamburg senate is where Trump has been forced to lay his head, but his aides insist it was the previous admininstration's job to do the 'advance' work in anticipation of a new president  Obama, now a private citizen and popular on the speaking circuit, would also be blamed for causing the same problem if Hillary Clinton had succeeded him  The White House is remaining officially mum about where the president is laying his head, and why. Spokespersons did not respond to requests for comment.  The officials who talked to DailyMail.com, including one with direct knowledge of White House travel and 'advance' operations, spoke on condition of anonymity.  Buzzfeed reported Thursday that Trump is staying in the government-owned Senate guest house in Hamburg instead of at a 5-star property like the luxury lodgings he owns.  The website published a list of which international delegations had snagged which hotels, including Russian president Vladimir Putin's group at the Park Hyatt and UK Prime Minister Theresa May's group at Le Meridien.  The leaders of China and Italy apparently reserved space at the Grand Elysée; the Indian and Canadian prime ministers are staying at the Atlantic Kempinski, along with German Chancellor Angela Merkel.  DailyMail.com contacted those four hotels and another six mentioned in the Buzzfeed report.  Hamburg's Park Hyatt, where Russian president Vladimir Putin's delegation is staying, was already fully booked before Trump won the November 2016 election, hotel staff said Friday  The leaders of China and Italy blocked off space at the Grand Elysée, which was also never an option for the White House because it was reserved more than 9 months ago  Staff at eight of them confirmed that they were completely booked by the time America's 2016 election was held in early November. the other two declined to comment.  'The funny thing,' a second Trump White House official said Friday, 'is that the U.S. delegation probably also wouldn't have had hotel rooms if Hillary Clinton had become president. It was already too late by Election Day.'  'But I bet even if Hillary had to sleep in a youth hostel,' the official added, 'no one in the press would say it was her staff's fault.'  Trump's travel staff originally sought to accommodate him at the Four Seasons hotel. But Saudi Arabia's King Salman, who feted Trump last month in Riyadh, already had the entire hotel blocked off for himself and his entourage.
Why 'Adventure Time,' Now In Its Fifth Season, Is More Groundbreaking Than You May Realize  While the vast enthusiasm for shows like "Breaking Bad" and "Mad Men" have lead the argument that television has entered a golden age of mature storytelling, animation has always thrived in the format with broad appeal indicative of different expectations that liberate the form. Even before "The Simpsons" proved the viability of adult-oriented primetime animation, "Looney Tunes" demonstrated the ageless appeal of slapstick comedy and that visual humor has the capacity to entrance viewers of all ages with a more complex set of access points. ("What's Opera, Doc?" can please everyone from a seven-year-old who may find it delightfully colorful to a 50-year-old who can appreciate its take on Wagner's operas.)  READ MORE: The original 'Adventure Time' short on Criticwire  Both "South Park" and "Family Guy" fully exist in the modern framework of adult-oriented animation pioneered by "The Simpsons," but Cartoon Network's "Adventure Time" more clearly represents the progress of the medium: Irreverent and narratively engaging, it's the ideal testament to animation's glorious pliability in an commercial arena otherwise defined by restrictions. With the start of its fifth season last night, "Adventure Time" once again proves that it's one of the most inventive shows on television.  Creator Pendleton Ward's program began as a beguiling animated short that quickly went viral in 2008; the resulting show neatly expanded on the initial trippy appeal, and continues to evolve in surprising directions. The basic plot follows an adolescent boy named Finn and his stretchy talking dog Jake, who live in a fantastical post-apocalyptic world filled with odd, funny creations like the dyspeptic Ice King and the Bubblegum Princess. (I could list more of them here, but you're better off sifting through the concise episodes to understand the bizarre creations Ward has developed.)  READ MORE: Is Adult Swim Stuck in a Rut of Nostalgia Bait?  While random, frequently adorable and effusive in that familiar Saturday morning cartoon way, "Adventure Time" also constantly — and with increasing frequency in its later episodes — toys with an incredibly sad subtext: The world has been destroyed in something called The Great Mushroom War. Everything in roommates Jake and Finn's island the Land of Ooo is haunted by isolation and even death. Their parents vanished long ago, and while the boys apparently enjoy their showdowns with the Ice King, his backstory as a scientist partly responsible for destroying civilization hints at a much darker history that the spirited nature of their encounters only partially covers up.  The cheery songs and vibrant artwork remain sincere while challenging the backdrop at the same time. The subtext of "Adventure Time" calls to mind "Calvin and Hobbes": Through friendship and playtime, the characters seemingly deny the bad vibes their surrounding world invites. The show's a testament to the prospects of cracking jokes when nothing seems funny anymore. Needless to say, viewers can learn a lot here no matter how much life they've lived.  Ward's playful, stream-of-conciousness approach to each 11-minute episode has turned his show into fodder for college stoners hip to its random exposition, but there's a lot more at work in the steadily growing atmosphere. Last night's season five premiere, entitled "Finn The Human & Jake The Dog," provided an interesting creative challenge for Ward and his team: a prolonged running time of half an hour, which basically amounted to a double episode.   Ultimately, it wasn't that much of a radical break from previous iterations, but it did allow the show's writers to take a shot at slightly more advanced storytelling while introducing more complicated visual concepts and fresh characters. In essence, "Adventure Time" got to showcase a fully realized adventure without compromising its goofier sensibilities. The contrast between the two main characters helped maintain that balance: Finn, stuck in a bleak alternative universe of his own making, endured a greater battle than he's ever faced before, while Jake made a new friend at the end of time and chilled out in a jacuzzi.  Picking up where the previous season left off, Finn and Jake chased the menacing undead villain known as the Lich into a time portal that provided access to the multiverse, a waystation between various worlds. In the middle of a floating nothingness, the Lich arrives at the bright yellow Time Room, where a lanky pink shadow figure known as Prismo (voiced, with an amusing amount of lackadaiscal charm, by the comedian Kumail Nanjiani) has the power to grant any visitor a single wish. Upon wishing the extinction of all life, the death-obsessed Lich promptly vanishes — but Jake and Finn, protected by their presence in the Time Room, remain behind. Prismo, just doing his job, quickly bemoans the Lich's grotesque appearance
This event occurred to me at least twelve years ago, and I still don't know what happened.  Driving home from a Friday night shift at the newspaper, my car's cruise control set on 55 mph, I drove by a road sign I've driven by hundreds of times. It reads, "Orrick: 5 Miles." Just as I went by, the Rolling Stones "Gimme Shelter" came on the radio.  Perfect. I lived in Orrick, Missouri, at the time, and "Gimme Shelter" was not only my favorite Rolling Stones tune, it was also four minutes, thirty-seven seconds long, which would last me all the way home.  Then my drive fell out of reality.  A pull on the car engine snapped me out of the road hypnosis that had overtaken me. It took me a few seconds to realize that pull was the cruise control trying to keep the speed steady up a hill. The trouble was there were no hills between that road sign and my turnoff. Looking out the window didn't help; a thick fog had enveloped the car and I could barely see the dotted line on the road. I slowed the car and drove up two more hills before I saw a light piercing through the fog.  Turning onto a gravel road toward the light, I found myself in the parking lot of a Jehovah's Witness church and knew where I was – five miles on the other side of my turnoff. As I sat in the parking lot, my car in park, trying to figure out how I missed the exit, I heard something I couldn't believe. "Gimme Shelter" still played on the radio. It continued to play for another minute and a half.  After I calmed a bit, I put the car in gear, pulled back onto the highway and went home. The fog quickly dissipated. I'd driven ten miles in three minutes at 55 mph. That wasn't possible. What happened to me?  Cases of missing time and distance are as common as they are confusing. The Internet is littered with tales of travelers entering a fog only to discover they're suddenly 300 miles away from home, or they've gone nowhere, but it's inexplicably hours later. Explanations range from time slips, to dimensional slips, to alien abduction. Whatever the case, Brandon White of Maryville, Missouri, has experienced missing time and distance; more than once. "The first time I was about ten and I was walking out in the front yard," White said. It was just after lunch.  As White went toward a thick ring of pine trees that surrounded his family's farmhouse, he saw something floating on the other side of the tree line. "It was pale, sort of translucent," he said. "It was passing between our house and the neighbor's house. I thought it was a blimp."  His afternoon suddenly disappeared. "The next thing I remember was coming in for dinner; 5 or 5:30," he said. "I didn't think about it at the time. As a kid, time was nothing."  But five hours of his life were just gone.  In his teens, his life got stranger. "At 13 or 14 I stopped sleeping. I was deathly afraid of sleep," he said. "I would fall to sleep, get into an REM sleep, and start screaming. I would wake up in strange places. In the yard, on the porch, upside down hanging from my bunk bed." White said he doesn't remember when he's been able to catch more than four hours of sleep a night. "I had very vivid nightmares," he said. Those nightmares often included a bird. "A big black crow. It would flap over my face, trying to take my breath."  Later in his teens when White worked at Long John Silver's in a town 38 miles away, he experienced more missing time. "I was riding my motorcycle. I remember that night very specifically. I worked a double shift," he said. "Before I left town, I filled up my (gas) tank." As he pulled onto a gravel road toward his parent's house, he saw an orange ball hanging low in the sky. "I stopped and thought, 'the moon's a weird color,'" he said. "Then I saw it was not the moon. The moon doesn't block the landscape." As he got closer, he saw this orange ball was thirty to forty feet in diameter, and hovered five or six feet off the ground.  He got off the motorcycle three hours simply disappeared. "It's the last thing I remember," he said. "It was 7:35 p.m. At 10:30 p.m. I pulled into Dad's driveway and something zoomed over me and disappeared into a valley."  He stopped the bike and got off, leaving it running as he dashed to a fence to look for the light. It had gone
TORONTO, ON - SEPTEMBER 18: Head coach Tom McLellian looks on from the bench while playing Team Finland in the second period during the World Cup of Hockey at the Air Canada Center on September 18, 2016 in Toronto, Canada. (Photo by Gregory Shamus/Getty Images)  That sure didn't take long. About as long as McDavid to Matthews to Eichel, turns out, as this Team North America have gone from longshot on the World Cup of Hockey odds board to favoured to knock off Russia in Monday night's feature, and now the third choice to win the whole tournament.  That's a pretty staggering turnaround in terms of perception. Online sportsbook Bodog pegged Team North America's 23-and-under young 'uns as 11-to-1 to win the tournament just before it began, with Russia the four-to-1 second choice behind favoured Canada. Earlier in the summer, the kids were as long as 20-to-1.  Now, off a pair of contrasting openers - NA was way too much for Finland in their opener, while Russia looked humdrum in losing to Sweden - and the kids are favoured to beat the Russians and go to 2-0 according to the latest odds on Monday's game, and sit right behind Sweden at 4-to-1 to win the tournament, while Russia has dropped to fourth in the reckoning at 9-to-1. In Europe the spread between the Swedes and team NA is a little wider, though not by much.  Canada remains odds-on to win, of course, and this one against Russia will doubtless be a much different proposition than the opener. But at least as far as the betting numbers are concerned, the Canada vs. North America final matchup that would warm the cockles of the continent's puckheads, not to mention Gary Bettman, looks very much alive.
Puerto Ricans like to say that politics is the national sport, and who could argue with that? With a participation rate hovering near 80% and campaigning that features elaborate floats, loud music, and a carnival atmosphere, election day on the island comes off like a mix between Super Bowl Sunday and Mardi Gras. So when the results came in this week that a majority island voters had selected the statehood option on this year's plebiscite, it would seem to be an unprecedented, game-changing event.  After all, in two of the three previous plebiscites, Commonwealth--the current status, which supporters call "free associated state" and detractors call "colony,"--was the clear winner. When the dust cleared and the 2012 tally was in, the numbers were striking: 61.2% of 1.8 million voters said they were in favor of statehood! The world would hold its breath to see if Congress could allow a 51st star would be added to Old Glory.  But it's not quite that simple. This was not your everyday straightforward plebiscite with Statehood, Commonwealth, and Independence (remember that?) options. It came out of a tortured political process that involved consultation with the President's Puerto Rico Task Force and in the end was never authorized by Congress. The plebiscite that Puerto Ricans voted for Tuesday involved a two-step process.  The first part of the vote asked "Are you satisfied with the current territorial status?" On that question, 54% voted no. Keep in mind that if you voted no here, you weren't necessarily against Commonwealth per se, you simply weren't satisfied with the current version of Commonwealth. The second question was "Which status do you prefer?" and the choices were Statehood, "Sovereign Free Associated State" (an as yet undetermined non-territorial hybrid of commonwealth and independence), and Independence.  This vote went to Statehood (61.5%), with "Sovereign Free Associated State" winning 33.3% of the vote and Independence 5.5%. A clear victory, right? Not exactly. During the campaign leading up to the vote the Popular Democratic Party, which represents the Commonwealth option, had been urging their followers to simply enter a blank vote in protest of the way the plebiscite was constructed, in their opinion to favor the statehood-supporting New Progressive Party.  So if you factor in the 466, 337 blank votes, Statehood only wins 45.1% of the total votes, and if you add the Sovereign Free Associated State and the blank ballots together, that would come to 51% of the votes, in other words, the same result of the plebiscites held in 1967 and 1993. In fact, it's almost a mirror image of the 1998 plebiscite, which was won by "None of the Above," the option campaigned for by the PDP in protest of that statehood-party authored plebiscite, by a margin of 50.3% to 46.5%.  To complicate matters even further, Luis Fortuño, the incumbent pro-statehood governor, was shockingly defeated by his Commonwealth party rival Alejandro García Padilla, leaving the statehood victory without its primary advocate. "This was first and foremost just an opinion poll that was never a binding resolution," said William Ramirez, head of the ACLU in Puerto Rico. "It's up to the party in power to go to Washington and slap it on someone's desk and fight for it."  In fact, all that incoming governor García Padilla is obliged to do under the law is send a letter to Washington stating the results. It can be argued that even if Fortuño won, he would have faced difficulty explaining why statehood should be considered when the option won only a plurality and not an absolute majority (over 50%) of the votes.  It is conceivable that Pedro Pierluisi, the island's incumbent resident commissioner (non-voting member of Congress), who is not only pro-statehood but a member of the Democratic Party with ties to Obama, might be able to argue the case, but that seems dubious given the absence of power of his office. Pierlusi was running again as running mate to Fortuño (who is staunchly Republican). He was re-elected to Resident Commissioner. A recent paper published by Latino Decisions in anticipation of Tuesday's vote states that "lawmakers are not likely to accept the outcomes of a status plebiscite that was not authorized by Congress."  For his part García Padilla has already announced that he will hold a Constitutional Convention in Puerto Rico in 2014 and seek a new plebiscite that would be approved by Congress.  Still, the incoming governor would do well to address the dissatisfaction with the current status that has been expressed by a majority of Puerto Ricans. Certainly the trend over the last several years has been disen
Donald Trump confused two Finnish journalists at a press conference on Monday, prompting the reporter to joke there were a lot of "blonde women" in her country.  The US president was taking questions with Finnish President Sauli Niinisto when he decided to go off script.  While such joint press conferences with foreign leaders typically involve two questions for US journalists and two for reporters from his counterpart's country, Mr Trump decided to keep it going.
Luigi Auriemma is truly and iconically a visionary.  Now, there are a lot of specifications and definitions out there, so I'll save you the legwork of researching for clarity:  Visionary - noun: a person of unusually keen foresight; a person who is given to audacious, highly speculative, or impractical ideas or schemes; (and finally, probably most relatable) dreamer.  Don't believe me? Take it from the person who probably knows best. Here's UConn Associate Head Coach Chris Dailey from "UConn '95: Birth of a Dynasty:  "We really focused on what we had. We didn't get caught up in what we didn't have. We focused on Geno & I as coaches. Our vision.  Starting a program, building a program. Being apart of that foundation. Right from the beginning, we've always focused on 'here's what we have:'  We have good people.  A toughness.  People who know how to play basketball.  & those players helped us recruit more talented players but still, with the same mindset."  At the time, it just seemed like common sense. Nothing too farfetched or overdramatic.  Fast forward to now, 999 wins later. Everyone wants to know the secret. Everyone wants into UConn's practice.  Everybody (now that Stewie's gone) wants to play UConn since they can't simulate what playing them is like. Everybody wants a piece of the pie.  But, Geno has been and will always be the first to tell you, it's just basketball. UConn just does it better than anyone else, and it's not a special drill or special potion. It begins and ends (not really — there's a ton of help from CD that goes unseen) with the Geno Auriemma effect.  Born from Italian parents who emigrated to Norristown, Pennsylvania when he was seven-years-old, Auriemma is the embodiment of the oft-misplaced concept of the "American Dream." Thankfully for basketball junkies like myself, the dream he chose to chase was his own.  Given his first opportunity to coach at St Joseph's University a year after graduating in 1978, Auriemma got to learn from one of the absolute best in Jim Foster, who is still coaching and currently serving as the head coach of the Chattanooga Mocs of the Southern Conference.  Ironically enough? His fellow assistant coach on that staff was none other than Notre Dame Head Coach Muffet McGraw. Talk about iron sharpening iron. It's no wonder they've all been successful. Imagine having your late night basketball junkie conversations consist of that caliber of IQ. I salivate just thinking about it.  Following a two-year return to coaching his high school boys team, Auriemma joined the University of Virginia women's basketball coaching staff as an assistant for four seasons under the incomparable Debbie Ryan. Immediately, two legends in the game — Ryan remained the UVA coach until retiring following the 2010-11 season, opening the door for current Head Coach JoAnne Boyle (who coached my sister) — got to show Geno Auriemma the ropes.  So, as much as one might try and call it luck of the draw, something is revealing to me that this was more destiny. A calling, if you will.  The last interview of the bunch, Auriemma was up against a strong selection of female coaches ready to take the reins of the UConn program for themselves. One of those names? Chris Dailey. Lore shows that if Geno had turned down the position, she would've been the hire. Maybe this will kill the question about why CD never leaves. She's where she wanted to be all along.  Remember the vision from before? Well, please bear in mind: This was literally, just a vision.  "Anything that remotely would describe what you would need to recruit good players to come to Connecticut? None of that was here.  There was no 'hey, come play at Connecticut.  Hey, come play in our conference.  Hey, come play in our building. Come to this school & get a great education.  Hey! Come live in this beautiful, vibrant college community.'  No. 'Hey! Come stay in our world-class dorms.'  No. There wasn't one tangible thing that you could put your finger on & say 'this is why you should come to Connecticut."  Wife Kathy even goes on to say, confidently, that she never imagined staying at UConn, and never got an inkling of such from Geno early on either. He was even quoted as saying he would "do three or four years here then move on to a real school that takes women's basketball seriously."  Well, that all
Leaders of WME and CAA have made efforts to address the sexual harassment crisis sweeping through the entertainment industry by encouraging employees at all levels to come forward if they experience or witness such behavior.  On Monday morning, WME CEO Ari Emanuel and executive chairman Patrick Whitesell convened a company-wide meeting of agents to discuss the recent swirl of allegations and the situation that emerged on Friday involving motion picture head Adam Venit and actor Terry Crews, who is a WME client.  On Friday, it was revealed that Venit was the Hollywood executive who Crews accused of groping him at a party. The actor told the story of the incident with an unnamed executive in a Twitter message he sent on Oct. 10, in response to the wave of disclosures from women about past experiences with sexual harassment with producer Harvey Weinstein and others.  It's understood that Crews had been weighing in recent days whether to publicly name Venit as the executive. Venit went on leave last week while WME investigates the situation that happened more than a year ago. Emanuel and Whitesell acknowledged the situation, first reported by Variety.  Related Talent Agencies Rocked by Sexual Harassment Allegations  Emanuel and Whitesell also held a separate meeting with the agency's assistants to reinforce that there will be no retaliation or hurdles to advancement for those who report incidents of inappropriate behavior related to work. One participant likened the message to the "if you see something, say something" slogan used in anti-terrorism campaigns.  Meanwhile, sources said CAA last week held a meeting in the TV department to clarify the various responsibilities of senior agents and establishing clear lines of reporting for various duties, all under the direction of TV chief Steve Lafferty. The TV department faced an abrupt change in late September when TV lit head Ryan Ly was let go following allegations of inappropriate behavior from five women in the department. Ly has not responded to Variety's requests for comment.  During the meeting, the discussion turned to the general topic of workplace harassment. Department leaders urged younger agents to report any problems early in an effort to ensure a nurturing and productive environment for all.  (Pictured: WME's Patrick Whitesell and Ari Emanuel)
FLINT, MI -- The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) is sending two liaisons to Michigan to aid in Flint's water crisis.  FEMA Director of Public Affairs Rafael Lemaitre sent out a tweet Friday, Jan. 8 that the stated the agency is "closely following the #FlintWater situation." Lemaitre sent out another tweet a short on his Twitter account that read:  "FEMA has also deployed 2 liaisons to the MI Emergency Ops Center for technical assistance. #FlintWater."  FEMA has also deployed 2 liaisons to the MI Emergency Ops Center for technical assistance. #FlintWater -- Rafael Lemaitre (@FEMAspox) January 8, 2016  It is not clear whether Gov. Rick Snyder requested the help from FEMA or whether the agency sent the officials on its own accord, according to a report from the Detroit Free Press.  The emergency operations center was activated after Governor Rick Snyder declared a state of emergency for Genesee County on Tuesday, Jan. 5.  The information center is set up to help with health and safety issues caused by lead in Flint's drinking water.  The Joint Information Center will serve as the state's central communications hub for the state of emergency. It is staffed by public information officers from several state agencies. The hours of operations will be 9 a.m. until 5 p.m. Monday thru Friday, until further notice.  The center is operating out of the Michigan State Police Emergency Management and Homeland Security Division in Lansing. State officials are working to move the center to Flint to better partner and coordinate with local agencies.  Public information and updates that include resources for residents, how to obtain free water filters, and lead testing will be made available at www.michigan.gov/FlintWater.
The SKWAWKBOX  Thanks to Mike Sivier of the outstanding Vox Political blog for drawing my attention to this. I've been snowed under all week and had missed it – and it's too good to miss.  At the beginning of April, I wrote about the Tories' despicable and clearly intentional abuse of statistics to support their 'reforms' and demonise disabled people (yet again) by suggesting that almost 900,000 Employment Support Allowance (ESA) claimants had dropped their claims rather than face medical examination.  On 11 May, I wrote to Andrew Dilnot, the head of the UK Statistics Authority (UKSA) after his 'spanking' of Iain (Duncan) Smith for abusing employment statistics, to ask him to look at the far worse ESA distortion, and invited readers of this blog to do the same, which many did.  It turns out a Labour MP, Sheila Gilmore, was ahead of the game. On 9 April, perhaps as a result…
Mountain West suspends official Jim Adams for two games The Mountain West announced football official Jim Adams has been suspended for two games due to what it referred to as "inappropriate conduct toward game management personnel."  Jimbo Fisher says he was just trying to get Tyrel Dodson's attention Jimbo Fisher says he grabbed Tyrel Dodson's face mask to get the "young man's attention" in the middle of Texas A&M's win over Arkansas.  LSU, Florida looking forward to challenge Head coaches Ed Orgeron and Dan Mullen break down the challenges each team brings and how important the Week 6 matchup is for both.  UK faces another test at A&M Head coaches Mark Stoops and Jimbo Fisher talk about their history in advance of the Wildcats' visit to College Station.  Alabama-Arkansas a 'trap' game for Crimson Tide Head coaches Nick Saban and Chad Morris discuss how the defenses could have a huge impact in the Week 6 contest.
Who Stands Where In A Crowded Elevator And Why?  She's in Finland now, getting her Ph.D. at the University of Jyvaskyla, but before that, when she was in Adelaide, Australia, she studied elevator behavior. Rebekah Rousi hung around two tall office towers in town, riding elevators up and down day after day, looking for patterns. When a bunch of people get into an elevator, she wondered, do they segregate in any predictable way? Do tall ones stand in the back? Do men stand in different places than women? Who looks where? She says she wasn't expecting or even predicting a particular configuration, but she found one.  Over and over, she noticed that older "more senior men in particular seem to direct themselves towards the back of the elevator cabins."  Younger men took up the middle ground.  And in the front, facing the doors, backs to the guys, stood "women of all ages."  She's not sure why. It wasn't segregation by height. It wasn't age, since older and younger women co-mingled. Clearly, the people in the back had the advantage of seeing everybody in the cabin, while people in the front had no idea who was behind them. Could there be a curiosity difference? A predatory difference?  There was a second pattern, one that broke along gender lines. "Men," she wrote, "looked in the side mirrors and the door mirrors" to openly check out the other passengers, and/or themselves.  Women didn't do that. "Women would watch the monitors and avoid eye contact with other users (unless in conversation)." They would only look at the mirrors (where they could check out the other passengers) when they were with other women. Eye-wise, the guys were roving, the ladies weren't.  "That's where I started thinking of power," Rebekah wrote me. The men who flocked to the back, who had a better view of their fellow passengers, were consistently older, more "senior" (I'm not sure how she knew that, but it's in her posted paper) and many of them "weren't concerned with 'getting caught' looking in the mirror." They gazed freely, suggesting a sense of privilege. Younger, less powerful men seemed to avoid that space, choosing a middle ground. The back of the box, (unlike the back of the bus in Alabama civil rights days) she decided, might be the elevator power zone.  Or ...  Perhaps a gender analysis is too easy. Power hierarchies in elevators, she wrote, "almost seemed too cliché." This could be about shyness. Bold people choose the back; shy people the front. Does that mean she thinks Australian women are more self-conscious than Australian men? She wouldn't go there, except to say, "I don't really want people to know how vain I am, so looking in the mirror (as a woman or not) when others are in the lift ... is highly avoided." By this analysis, the back of the elevator is the Vanity-Unleashed zone.  Basically, she's still puzzled. A pattern shows up. But the explanation, she said, slipping into academic shyness, "awaits further analysis." Then she added, "I'd be really interested to hear what your listeners (she means you, you reading this) have to say about the issue."  The always mischievous Latif Nasser (who is, I should mention, a regular contributor to Radiolab) read this post and sent me a video that describes a very different kind of elevator behavior. What happens if you step inside and everybody around you is doing something odd? Do you do it too?
PHILADELPHIA -- Right fielder Hunter Pence and the Philadelphia Phillies agreed Friday to a $10.4 million, one-year contract.  The deal was at the midpoint between the $11.8 million he had asked for in arbitration last week and the $9 million the Phillies had offered. He can earn additional award bonuses.  Pence hit .314 with 22 homers and a career-high 97 RBIs for Houston and Philadelphia last season, when he made $6.9 million.  A two-time All-Star, he led the Phillies in batting average (.324), on-base percentage (.394), slugging percentage (.560), hits (67) and total bases (116) after he was acquired from the Astros on July 29. Pence has a .292 average, 114 homers and 412 RBIs in five seasons with Houston and Philadelphia.  Pence also can earn $50,000 for All-Star election or selection, $50,000 each for Gold Glove, Silver Slugger and league championship series MVP, and $100,000 apiece for NL MVP and World Series MVP.  Philadelphia has settled with all its players in arbitration.
What it is  A solution to a problem that only exists in certain minds. Reddit loves screenshots and tends to push a lot of similar ones to the top in attempt to say "look, look, there's something different this time".  This simple app can hosts on heroku serving the cached version of a certain web page screenshot. When it sees that it's outdated it launches a re-generation job in background.  It was and is a deployment schema test application for me, thus there are no tests and it is generally quite crude. If you find it useful and want to extend it - grab it and call it your own.  How to use  Create new heroku instance with: heroku create humbleshot --stack cedar --buildpack http://github.com/Slotos/heroku-buildpack-ruby.git Install memcached addon for your app. Either with heroku addons:add memcache:5mb or through heroku web interface. Clone this repository with git clone git://github.com/Slotos/humbleshot.git Push to heroku Run heroku run rake db:migrate Scale worker app up with heroku ps:scale worker=1  How NOT to use it  If you have your own server, VPS or whatever - do not use this app. Just grab phantomjs, rasterise.js example and extend it into a cropper. Then use that cropper with cron and server a static file. This solution is ridiculously complex for anything but heroku with additional challenge of not using S3.
Product Details  Kaitlin Style calligraphy has a casual elegance to it because of its artistic, bohemian whimsy. The best part? No need to draw out pencil guidelines! You can free-hand the Kaitlin for use on any envelope or project without worrying about making guides. To begin, you'll need a straight dip pen or an oblique dip pen (whichever you prefer), a Nikko G nib (for beginners) or a Brause EF66 nib (for intermediate), sumi or India ink, and a printer and paper. I highly recommend printing TPK calligraphy worksheets out on 32# laserjet paper (you can use laserjet paper in any printer). It will be easiest to fill out this worksheet if you have taken the Beginner's Modern Calligraphy Online Course, though many learners have worked through the worksheet without doing so.  The Kaitlin Style calligraphy worksheet set underwent a complete redesign in August 2018, and it features the following:  Core Calligraphy Worksheet (34 Pages)  The Kaitlin Style Core Calligraphy Worksheet includes everything you need to know to get started, including:  Supply List  Detailed Instructions for Creating Faux Calligraphy  Faux Calligraphy Practice  Detailed Instructions for Creating Dip Pen Calligraphy  Drills  Dip Pen Calligraphy Alphabet Practice  Dip Pen Calligraphy Word Practice  Stroke Reference Sheet  Instructions for Writing Bounce Lettering  Tips for Writing Kaitlin Style Calligraphy  Troubleshooting & FAQ Page  Lined General Practice  Intensive Alphabet Practice (67 Pages)  Print off specific pages on a per-need basis to master letters that you have trouble with.  Intensive Word Practice (27 Pages)  Print off specific pages on a per-need basis to practice connecting Kaitlin Style letters together to make words.  If you have any questions about TPK printable calligraphy worksheet sets, feel free to get in touch with me or visit the FAQ page!  Add to cart
n. Representing the slightly raised grass area outside of Stanford Hall at Villanova . A great area in the heat of the day to go box (see 'box') hunting.  So are we gonna look for box on the grassy knoll today or what?Look at all of that box on the grassy knoll
President Donald Trump's personal doctor has shed some new light on the health of his most famous patient.  The president takes a statin to maintain a healthy rate for his cholesterol and lipid levels, antibiotics to combat a skin condition known as rosacea, and Propecia, a prostate drug that promotes hair growth, The New York Times reported on Wednesday. Bornstein, who has been Trump's doctor for more than 35 years, believes Trump is healthy and his medical care is "exactly up to date."  He also claimed that Trump has continued to annually undergo checkups and take important medical tests since first becoming a Bornstein patient in 1980.  Dr. Bornstein would not tell The New York Times whether he still works as President Trump's physician, while White House officials refused to comment on whether the information provided by Dr. Bornstein is accurate.  "At times in the interviews, Dr. Bornstein was moody, ranging from saying that Mr. Trump's health 'is none of your business' to later volunteering facts," reported The New York Times.  Bornstein has attracted media attention in the past due to his penchant for making colorful comments. These include downplaying the possibility that Trump, who at age 70 is America's oldest first-time elected president, could die in office. "If something happens to him, then it happens to him," he said.  The doctor also ridiculed Hillary Clinton for her age, even though she is a year younger than Trump. "She's an old lady," he said. "She's an old lady. It's funny, isn't it?"  In late 2015, Bornstein wrote in a health report, "If elected, Mr. Trump, I can state unequivocally, will be the healthiest individual ever elected to the presidency."  Despite Trump's advanced age, during the 2016 presidential election more focus was placed on Clinton's potential health issues than his.  Bornstein may have violated the law by talking to the Times.
Privacy policy  This Privacy Policy describes how and when I collect, use, and share information when you purchase an item from me, contact me, or otherwise use my services through Etsy.com or its related sites and services.   This Privacy Policy does not apply to the practices of third parties that I do not own or control, including Etsy or any third party services you access through Etsy. You can reference the Etsy Privacy Policy to learn more about its privacy practices.   Information I Collect   To fulfill your order, you must provide me with certain information (which you authorized Etsy to provide to me), such as your name, email address, postal address, payment information, and the details of the product that you're ordering. You may also choose to provide me with additional personal information (for a custom order of jewelry, for example), if you contact me directly.  I rely on a number of legal bases to collect, use, and share your information, including:  · as needed to provide my services, such as when I use your information to fulfill your order, to settle disputes, or to provide customer support;  · when you have provided your affirmative consent, which you may revoke at any time, such as by signing up for my mailing list;  · if necessary to comply with a legal obligation or court order or in connection with a legal claim, such as retaining information about your purchases if required by tax law; and  · as necessary for the purpose of my legitimate interests, if those legitimate interests are not overridden by your rights or interests, such as 1) providing and improving my services. I use your information to provide the services you requested and in my legitimate interest to improve my services; and 2) Compliance with the Etsy Seller Policy and Terms of Use. I use your information as necessary to comply with my obligations under the Etsy Seller Policy and Terms of Use.   Information Sharing and Disclosure   Information about my customers is important to my business. I share your personal information for very limited reasons and in limited circumstances, as follows:  · Etsy. I share information with Etsy as necessary to provide you my services and comply with my obligations under both the Etsy Seller Policy and Etsy Terms of Use.  · Service providers. I engage certain trusted third parties to perform functions and provide services to my shop, such as delivery companies. I will share your personal information with these third parties, but only to the extent necessary to perform these services.  · Business transfers. If I sell or merge my business, I may disclose your information as part of that transaction, only to the extent permitted by law.  · Compliance with laws. I may collect, use, retain, and share your information if I have a good faith belief that it is reasonably necessary to: (a) respond to legal process or to government requests; (b) enforce my agreements, terms and policies; (c) prevent, investigate, and address fraud and other illegal activity, security, or technical issues; or (d) protect the rights, property, and safety of my customers, or others.   Data Retention   I retain your personal information only for as long as necessary to provide you with my services and as described in my Privacy Policy. However, I may also be required to retain this information to comply with my legal and regulatory obligations, to resolve disputes, and to enforce my agreements. I generally keep your data for the following time period: 4 years.   Transfers of Personal Information Outside the EU   I may store and process your information through third-party hosting services in the US and other jurisdictions. As a result, I may transfer your personal information to a jurisdiction with different data protection and government surveillance laws than your jurisdiction. If I am deemed to transfer information about you outside of the EU, I rely on Privacy Shield as the legal basis for the transfer, as Google Cloud is Privacy Shield certified.   Your Rights   If you reside in certain territories, including the EU, you have a number of rights in relation to your personal information. While some of these rights apply generally, certain rights apply only in certain limited cases. I describe these rights below:  · Access. You may have the right to access and receive a copy of the personal information I hold about you by contacting me using the contact information below.  · Change, restrict, delete. You may also have rights to change, restrict my use of, or delete your personal information. Absent exceptional circumstances (like where I am required to store data for legal reasons) I will generally delete your personal information upon request.  · Object. You can object to (i) my processing of some of your information based on my legitimate interests and (ii) receiving marketing messages from me after providing your express consent to receive them. In such cases, I will delete your personal information unless I have compelling and legitimate grounds to continue using that information or if it is needed for legal reasons.  · Complain. If
Bernie Sanders has Hillary Clinton's team worried about Iowa.  The New York Times writes that the crowds and unexpectedly strong showing garnered by the Vermont senator are setting off worry among Clinton advisers and allies, who believe Sanders could actually overtake her in Iowa polls by the fall. They even believe he could defeat her in the nation's first nominating contest there. The enthusiasm Sanders has generated has called into question Clinton's early strategy of focusing on a listening tour of small groups and wooing big donors in private settings, the Times writes. "We are worried about him, sure. He will be a serious force for the campaign, and I don't think that will diminish," said Jennifer Palmieri, the Clinton campaign's communications director, on MSNBC's "Morning Joe" on Monday.  Carson's cash: Before Republican presidential hopeful Ben Carson was vying for votes from members of Christian organizations, he was charging them tens of thousands of dollars for speeches. As Politico writes, Carson brought in nearly $2 million delivering inspirational speeches to faith-based groups including Christian high schools and pregnancy centers in 2014. A Politico analysis of his financial disclosure form showed that four of his five most lucrative speeches were at such Christian venues. His speaking fees varied widely, from $12,320 to $48,500, according to the disclosures.  The next liberal cause: The Washington Post's Greg Sargent writes that Senate Democrats will soon roll out a new universal pre-kindergarten proposal. If it gets a vote, he says, it will put members of both parties on the record as to whether they support national action to dramatically expand the availability of child care to poor and working families. The proposal could be paid for by reining in corporate tax breaks, according to the Democrats. Specifically, the program would be funded by scaling back corporate "inversions," in which companies declare their U.S. operations are owned by a subsidiary abroad. That results in profits being shifted to places where they are taxed at lower rates.  Trump workers talk: Donald Trump's recent comments about drug dealers and rapists crossing into the U.S. from Mexico aren't sitting well with some of the workers building a new Trump hotel in downtown Washington. The Washington Post says the job site is laden with tension in the wake of Trump's remarks, since it's Latin American immigrants who are doing the bulk of the work. The Post, in fact, says Trump's company may be relying on some undocumented workers to finish the $200 million hotel, which will sit five blocks from the White House. A Trump spokeswoman said the company and its contractors follow all applicable laws. But some workers said they are now worried about their jobs.  Obama hosting Senate Democrats: President Barack Obama and Senate Democrats will huddle at the White House on Tuesday, the Hill reports. The White House says it will mostly be a social gathering, but the Hill notes it will give Obama a chance to meet with his allies in Congress, who have a long to-do list this month. The partisan standoff over government spending is one potential topic of discussion, and the White House is also expected to lean heavily on Senate Democrats to support a nuclear agreement with Iran if a deal is reached this week.
French wife of Norwegian neo-Nazi released from custody: source  PARIS - Agence France-Presse  Officers from the Interior Security Intelligence Services (DCRI) store pieces of evidence in a car on July 18, 2013 near the main police station in Brive-la-Gaillarde, southwestern France, where Norwegian black metal rocker and convicted killer, Kristian Vikernes, is still in custody and questionned by the anti-terrorist services. AFP photo  A French woman arrested with her husband, Norwegian extremist Kristian Vikernes who is suspected of plotting a "major terrorist act", has been freed from custody, a judicial source said Wednesday.Vikernes and his wife Marie Cachet were arrested on Tuesday at their home in a village in the central Correze region of France. The interior ministry said Vikernes, a black metal musician and convicted killer, was "close to the neo-Nazi movement" and could have been preparing a "major terrorist act".Vikernes, who also goes by the name "Varg", Norwegian for "wolf", had been under surveillance for several years.But anti-terrorism authorities in Paris opened a probe into the father-of-three at the beginning of the month after his wife purchased weapons -- albeit legally as she has a permit.Officers seized five long-range weapons at their home including four 22 caliber Long Rifles.Vikernes is notorious for having stabbed to death a guitarist from another black metal band. He spent 16 years in prison for the crime.Interior Minister Manuel Valls conceded that they had as yet identified "no target, no plan", but intelligence chiefs had decided it was important "to act before and not afterwards"."The DCRI (French domestic intelligence service) considered that messages he had posted on the Internet expressed huge violence." Vikernes' former lawyer in his murder trial on Wednesday criticised France for the arrest, calling the charges against him "thin."
Your browser does not support HTML5 video tag.Click here to view original GIF  Wow, today is an auspicious day. Not only is June 14, 1940 the day that Nazi troops invaded Paris during World War II, it's the day that—just six years later—Donald Trump, an exploded goose down pillow bathed in menstrual blood, would invade the United States.   70 years later, boy, what he has accomplished! He founded a now-folded steak company; a now-folded, fraudulent university; a now-folded airline, and fairly soon, he very well could become CEO of a folded country. (A fairytale about King Donald: everything he touches turns to fold!)  Advertisement  In honor of the man who wants to remove our First Amendment rights, we decided to embrace them wholeheartedly, while we still can, by publishing a list of 70 of Jezebel's favorite Trump descriptions since the start of 2016.  Trump, while you might destroy America as you've destroyed essentially every business venture you've ever run, you've made us examine our own creativity, and realize that the best thesaurus is the thesaurus of the heart.  Advertisement  Happy birthday—you are a:
Kronos One was a Klingon K't'inga-class battle cruiser that was in service with the Klingon Imperial Fleet in the late 23rd century. Kronos One was the flagship of the Chancellor of the Klingon High Council.  Contents show]  History Edit  In 2293, Chancellor Gorkon traveled aboard Kronos One to meet the Federation starship USS Enterprise-A, which was to escort it to a peace conference on Earth. During the journey, however, Kronos One was fired upon, apparently by the Enterprise, and seriously damaged by two photon torpedoes. Once Kronos One was disabled, two assassins beamed over from the Enterprise, and began to systematically murder members of the crew, including Gorkon.  After Kronos One had restored power, General Chang, the chancellor's chief of staff, took command and prepared to fire on the Enterprise, but Captain Kirk, hoping to preserve the truce, promptly surrendered. It was later revealed that Kronos One was actually fired on by an experimental Bird-of-Prey which had the unique ability to fire while under cloak, as part of a conspiracy to sabotage peace talks between the Federation and the Klingon Empire. (Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country)  Personnel Edit  See: Kronos One personnel  Appendices Edit  Background information Edit  The name of the Klingon homeworld was first mentioned in The Undiscovered Country, in which it is identified as Kronos (spelled that way in the film's script). The spelling "Qo'noS" was subsequently devised by Marc Okrand for Star Trek: The Next Generation, in order to conform to his previously developed rules of Klingon orthography. In Klingonese, Kronos One would be written Qo'noS wa', but MA uses the script spelling for this ship. For more information see the talk page.  The Star Trek Customizable Card Game also uses the spelling Kronos One.  The name of this ship mimics Air Force One, the airplane of the President of the United States. (Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country (Special Edition) text commentary)  Visual effects director Bill George discussed the modifications made to the Kronos One in the January 1992 issue of American Cinematographer, and later in Charting the Undiscovered Country: The Making of Trek VI.  In the article he said:  "The model needed to be repainted anyway, so I proposed that we make it look very distinct from those in the first film, especially since it was one of the few models we could alter to look new for this show. We did some research into military costuming, and came up with the concept that when these ships return victorious from battle, the Klingons build some sort of epaulet onto their wings or paint a new stripe on. We painted the model brown and red with gold highlights, then added golden etched brass epaulets on it, based on some of the helmet designs we'd seen. It contrasts nicely with the Enterprise, which is very smooth and monochromatic and cool, while this Klingon ship is very regal and ostentatious and warm."  The Starships RPG sourcebook uses the spelling "Quo'noS One" and gives its registry as IKC-7748.
Diclidurus albus Wied-Neuwied, 1820     Diclidurus isabella (Thomas, 1920)    Diclidurus scutatus (Peters, 1869)     Peropteryx macrotis (Wagner, 1843)     Micronycteris hirsuta  Peters, 1869     Mimon bennettii  (Gray,1838)     Trachops cirrhosus  (Spix, 1823)     Anoura caudifer (E. Geoffroy, 1818)     Dryadonycteris capixaba (Nogueira, Lima, Peracchi & Simmons, 2012)    Glossophaga soricina (Pallas, 1766)  [photo]        Glyphonycteris behnii  (Peters, 1865)    Glyphonycteris daviesi  (Hill, 1964)  [photo]    Neonycteris pusilla  (Sanborn, 1949)    Trinycteris nicefori  (Sanborn, 1949)     Rhinophylla pumilio  Peters, 1865     Mesophylla macconnelli Thomas, 1901  [photo]    Platyrrhinus angustirostris  Velazco, Gardner & Patterson, 2010    Platyrrhinus aurarius (Handley & Ferris, 1972)    Platyrrhinus infuscus (Peters, 1880)  [photo] [photo]    Cynomops milleri (Osgood, 1914)    Cynomops paranus (Thomas 1901)     Eumops glaucinus (Wagner, 1843)    Molossops neglectus Williams & Genoways, 1980    Molossops temminckii (Burmeister, 1854)     Eptesicus taddeii (Miranda, Bernardi & Passos, 2006)    Histiotus montanus (Philippi & Lanbeck, 1861)     Lasiurus cinereus  (Beauvois, 1796)    Lasiurus ebenus  Fazzolari-Corrêa, 1994    Lasiurus ega  (Gervais, 1856)     Rhogeessa hussoni  Genoways & Baker, 1996     Myotis nigricans (Schinz, 1821)     Myotis simus (Thomas, 1901) References Feijó, J.A., P.A. Rocha & S.L. Althoff. 2015. New species of Histiotus (Chiroptera: Vespertilionidae) from northeastern Brazil. Zootaxa 4048: 412-427. Gregorin, R., A.S. Tahara & D.F. Buzzato. 2011. Molossus aztecus and other small Molossus (Chiroptera: Molossidae) in Brazil. Acta Chiropterologica 13(2): 311-317. Gregorin, R., L.M. Moras, L.H. Acosta, K.L. Vasconcellos, J.L. Poma, F.R. Santos & R.C. Paca. 2016. A new species of Eumops (Chiroptera: Molossidae) from southeastern Brazil and Bolivia. Mammalian Biology 81: 235-246. Moratelli, R., A.L. Perachhi, D. Dias & J.A. Oliveira. 2011. Geographic variation in South American populations of Myotis nigricans (Schinz, 1821) (Chiroptera, Vespertilionidae), with the descriptions of two new species. Mammalian Biology 76: 592-607. Moratelli, R. & D. Dias. 2015. A new species of nectar-feeding bat, genus Lonchophylla , from the Caatinga of Brazil (Chiroptera, Phyllostomidae). ZooKeys 514: 73-91. Nogueira, M.R., I.P. Lima, A.L. Peracchi & N.B. Simmons. 2012. New genus and species of nectar-feeding bat from the Atlantic Forest of southeastern Brazil (Chiroptera, Phyllostomidae, Glossophagina
Ihsahn has been out with Emperor for a series of reunion shows this year and spoke with Noisey of the experience, among other things. One such topic was the changing perception of metal, of which Ihsahn offered the following take:  For us being here now against being there then, I guess our whole career is built on this kind of mystique almost. People didn't know shit about us. We were just crazy Norwegians from a place that most people hadn't heard of doing this extreme music in this strange makeup. [Laughs] So people had absolutely no clue. Whereas today you get in touch with the biggest stars on Twitter or Facebook or whatever. Nothing is private. It's very bad times to be kind of a mysterious black metal artist, I guess. It'd be very hard to build that kind of niche again if you were a young band starting out today. [Laughs]"  "I think particularly black metal has gone gray like many other metal subgenres or like music in general, really. You start out new as a phenomenon, and there gradually becomes different directions in that. Some people do something new, and then some people copy it, and it becomes watered down. It becomes gray. A lot of people involved in this genre originally do a lot of other interesting stuff. The genre itself has changed, but I think extreme music – it's more a matter of the whole music industry having changed. That's kind of the biggest thing if you take black metal now and then.  Those hoping the live reunion in support of the 20th anniversary of "In The Nightside Eclipse" would stoke some creative embers will be left in the cold though. When asked if new music or a full-fledged reunion was in the works, Ihsahn offered:   "Not at all. Not at all. I couldn't really see the point. I don't think that would be something that would feel natural and feel creative, and that's not meant to disrespect the other guys that I play with. But if you listen to the music that Samoth does now, there's quite a big difference between what he does and what I do. I think, musically, we can come together and perform the stuff that we did when those musical differences were constructive.  If it was up to me, Emperor now would sound like my solo stuff. Not that I would ever call it Emperor because then it wouldn't be that as it would be compromised. For me it would just be a different logo on the front because for me in the way I want to express myself in metal now, that's what I already do. To make an Emperor album, I'm sure financially speaking, it would be tempting.  It's a well-known brand, and you could probably do a lot of things promotion wise with it, but at the same time, it's the fact that we've maintained, and the fact that we've been uncompromising. I think both with Emperor and the stuff we've done outside of Emperor, I'm very conscious about that mutual agreement with my listeners who pick up my album and make this possible. I don't want to trick myself, and I don't want to screw them either. So every time I make an album I honestly try to do my absolute best, and I don't think I do my best if I start thinking about what would people want and what would people expect of me or this or that.  If we did that with Emperor or outside of Emperor, people would smell the dishonesty in that. It's not really an ego trip, either. Of course it is very egotistical and selfish of me in a very good way of just doing exactly what I want, but at the same time I think that is the most honest way of doing this. If people want to make music that people expect to have and what the market wants, that's kind of a different genre and a different industry. [Laughs]  People who want Emperor to get back together, I'm not sure if they know what they're asking for. What kind of Emperor album would it be? Would it be something we could honestly do in 2014 or 2015? It would be easy for us to make an album that sounded like something from back in the day in the vein of Eclipse or Anthems or whatever, but who would actually want that? It would be pointless, and in the end I think people respect it.  It's like when you get older and some people start wishing "Oh, I wish I was young again." It's not gonna happen, but it's a nice thought. But at the same time, if you were young again, you wouldn't want to experience all that crap all over again either way. [Laughs] It's kind of like that, and I honestly think that it creates a bit of trust between us as artists and the audience."
Download whitepaper (PDF 878 KB)  Download whitepaper (PDF 16 MB)  Introduction  In recent years, embedded software security has become a red-hot topic, attracting the attention of high profile security researchers from all around the globe. However, the quality of code is still far from perfect as long as its security is considered. For instance, the CVE-2017-5721 SMM Privilege Elevation vulnerability in the firmware could affect such scope of vendors like Acer, ASRock, ASUS, Dell, HP, GIGABYTE, Lenovo, MSI, Intel, and Fujitsu. This white paper is intended to describe how to detect a vulnerability in a motherboard firmware with the help of the following tools:  Intel DAL  UEFITool  CHIPSEC  RWEverything  and how to bypass the patch that fixes this vulnerability.  For those readers who need some background information, here is the list of helpful additional materials:  Preliminary stage of the research  Making a showcase stand  To make a showcase, we used the GA-Q170M-D3H motherboard with Intel Q170 Express chipset. The motherboard turned out to be a perfect choice for the research, due to the following reasons:  Firmware updates are available as a binary image. Therefore, there is no need for users to burden themselves with extracting firmware parts from .exe files, in contrast with some other vendors' devices. Note: In the scope of the research, we used the latest available firmware version – F22.  The firmware is based on AMI BIOS Aptio V widely used by motherboard and laptop manufacturers.  It is possible to enable the Intel Direct Connect Interface.  The most obvious question that may come to a reader's mind here is: ''What is the Intel Direct Connect Interface?" In a nutshell, the Intel Direct Connect Interface (the DCI) is a technology that allows low-level processor debugging without putting much effort in the process. The only thing needed to debug a target system is the Intel Skylake processor (6th gen. or higher) and USB 3.0 Debugging Cable, and, of course, USB 3.0 ports in both host and target systems. To operate with the interface one can use the Intel DFx Abstraction Layer (DAL) application available as a part of the Intel System Studio trial version. For more details, see "Intel DCI Secrets".  It is also necessary to install a CPU on the motherboard. The motherboard used in the scope of the research was equipped with Intel Core i3-6320. Of course, the DRAM is also needed to be installed. The assembled showcase stand looked this way (see Fig. 1).  As you can see on the picture, we have unsoldered the SPI flash memory (which stores the motherboard's firmware) and put it into SOIC8 adapter. Hence, if we occasionally "brick" the system we would be able to recover the original firmware image using the hardware programmer.  Enabling Intel DCI on a target system  There are two ways to turn on DCI: the first one is simple, the other is difficult, which is quite obvious.  Enabling Intel DCI. The easy way  If your system is based on System on Chip (SoC), you must be able to enable DCI using the BIOS Setup (see Fig. 2).  Another option is to use the INTEL-SA-00073 vulnerability that some motherboards have. This vulnerability allows enabling the DCI right from a target platform by writing just one byte to memory.  It turned out that GA-Q170M-D3H has no option to enable the DCI in BIOS Setup. In such a case it is worth using PCH Private Configuration Space while the system is running (see Fig. 3).  DCI Control Register (ECTRL) — Offset 4h  According to the documentation, the DCI activation is conducted by toggling the fourth bit of the ECTRL register. The bit is located in memory at SBREG_BAR + (0xB8 << 0x10) + 4. The showcase had installed Windows 10 Enterprise, that is why the RW-Everything tool was used. Unfortunately, it was not possible to enable the DCI with the help of the fourth bit, while the eighth one is set to value 1. By practical consideration, it was found out that the eighth bit stands for "Locked", which hinders the DCI during the system operation. Nonetheless, if a system register is empty, there are all chances to enable the debugging interface without any difficulties (see Fig. 4).  Enabling DCI. The difficult way  The DCI can be enabled by changing default settings of BIOS or PCH Straps (held inside the firmware image) with Intel Flash
Former NXIVM member says she was invited to a secret sorority, then branded  Edmondson told ABC News and in a complaint to the New York State Department of Health that she thought they were going to get a tattoo , but then , as she said in our interview , they found out she and the other women were going to be branded .   Edmondson said each of the women would lie down naked and then was branded with a cauterizing device , without any anesthesia .   Former members who spoke with ABC News said Raniere is very protective of his teachings and requires participants to sign confidentiality agreements .   After attending NXIVM seminars for more than a decade , Edmondson said she was approached about an opportunity to join a secret sorority .   Edmondson said she and four other women , one by one , submitted to being branded by a woman named Dr. Danielle Roberts .   In her complaint to New York State Department of Health , Edmondson said she was told the brand was a Latin symbol but then said she realized it included the letters " K " and " R ," which she took to be the initials for NXIVM founder Keith Raniere .   In a letter posted on the NXIVM website , Raniere said , " There is no merit to the allegations that we are abusing , coercing or harming individuals ." Raniere said the secret sorority is " Not part of NXIVM and I am not associated with the group ." The letter also said , " Our experts say members of the sorority are thriving , healthy , happy , better off , and haven't been coerced ." When ABC News requested comment from Nancy Salzman , she referred us to this letter .
You need Tor, and Tor is asking for your support  For decades, privacy and freedom of thought and expression have been valued as human rights. Please take a moment to read articles 12, 18, and 19 of ↑The Universal Declaration of Human Rights dating back to 1948.  In free, democratic countries we took those rights for granted. Even without knowing or caring about human rights, among family and friends we chatted without being overheard, we shopped anonymously and paid with cash, we walked the streets anonymously without being afraid of unknown strangers crossing our paths. In libraries we read books and newspapers while nobody spied on our interests.  That situation has changed dramatically in recent years with two noteworthy twists. First, in an article worth your time Eben Moglen explained in 2013 (predating the Snowden disclosures!) how we have ↑entangled ourselves in the Net. We surround ourselves with all kinds of "smart" devices such as phones, smart watches, smart meters, smart TVs, e-book readers, glasses, cars, all of which have eyes and ears of their own, monitor our location, our communication, our behavior most—if not all—of the time. Apps in those devices transmit what they observe into the Net, under incomprehensible privacy piracy policies. Once in the Net, that data is traded, stolen, re-purposed—beyond our control, consent, or knowledge.  Second, for reasons that I cannot comprehend, (even) democratic governments seem to assume that our human rights do not need to be respected on the Net. They demand openly and enforce covertly access to our communication, to our data, effectively—the more we entangle ourselves in the Net—to our lives.  If you believe that the human rights to privacy as well as freedom of thought and expression should also be your rights, even if you move on the Net, you must learn and practice digital self-defense. Essentially, you need to choose apps and tools that respect your freedom and privacy, which requires ↑free software based on strong cryptography. For example, to protect your e-mails you may want to use ↑GnuPG as explained in ↑this guide to e-mail self-defense. As messenger you may want to switch to ↑Signal. For Web surfing you may want to use the ↑Tor Browser.  ↑Tor is cutting-edge anonymity research turned into easily usable free software. Briefly, Tor re-routes your network data through randomly selected relays on the Net, thus hiding who is communicating what with whom. More information on how Tor works can be found on the ↑Tor overview page and in the ↑Tor FAQ. Tor is built by a non-profit organization that is currently asking for ↑donations.  Make sure to read the ↑download warning and try the ↑Tor Browser today. It's easy to install and run. Be warned, however, that surfing will be slower in general and that some misguided sites may refuse to load unless you solve a ↑captcha (which may or may not go away if you reload the page via "New Circuit for this site" from Tor Browser's menu underneath the onion icon).  If you like Tor, the project is asking for your ↑donations, and you are in good company: ↑Edward Snowden and Laura Poitras use Tor. Security guru ↑Bruce Schneier recommends that you use Tor.  If you don't like Tor, you can help to ↑improve it.  And, as a final remark, if you believe that Tor is being misused by "bad guys," then, of course, you are right. Tor, just like about any other tool created by mankind, can be used by law-abiding citizens as well as by the scum of the earth.
"In fact, even the NRA used to support expanded background checks. The current leader of the NRA used to support these background checks."  — President Obama, remarks on Senate vote on gun bill, April 17, 2013  Some readers were curious to learn more about the National Rifle Association's purported support for background checks. As it happens, there is a bit of fact checker dispute about this history.  PolitiFact in March rated as "true" this statement by New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg: "In fact, if you go back to 1999, [NRA chief executive] Wayne LaPierre testified on behalf of the NRA that background checks were appropriate and should be done."  But last week FactCheck.org dinged Vice President Biden for making a claim similar to the president. FactCheck.org, which issues no ratings, said Biden described the NRA's policies through "rose-colored glasses," because the organization only supported language denounced as a sham by then-President Bill Clinton.  When fact checkers disagree, it's often because the statements being vetted are slightly different. Bloomberg, for instance, carefully did not use the word "support" and he did not refer to the "good old days" of working with the NRA, as Biden did. (PolitiFact, however, on Thursday reiterated its "true' ruling for Obama's statement above.)  The Fact Checker has learned from decades of covering politics and diplomacy that looking at the words sometimes is not enough; actions are also important. Is this a case where "support" for a particular action may have only been tactical, designed to block or kill proposals that pose a danger to an organization?  As former House speaker Newt Gingrich memorably explained during the GOP presidential debates in 2011, the individual mandate that formed the core of President Obama's health care law was originally designed to block health reform efforts by Hillary Clinton: "In 1993, in fighting HillaryCare, virtually every conservative saw the mandate as a less-dangerous future than what Hillary was trying to do….It's now clear that the mandate, I think, is clearly unconstitutional. But, it started as a conservative effort to stop HillaryCare in the 1990s."  In other words, it was tactical maneuver — subject to change later.  The history of the NRA's "support" for expanded background checks is worth recounting, in part because it has striking resemblances to the current gun-control battle.  The Facts  As with this year, the gun-control battle of 1999 was sparked by a horrific school shooting: the April 20, 1999, Columbine High School massacre in which two students killed 12 students and a teacher before committing suicide. President Clinton, similar to President Obama, pushed for immediate action on gun-control legislation.  In the context of Columbine, LaPierre testified before a panel of the House Judiciary Committee, and trod a very careful line between "what's reasonable and what's not." So, LaPierre said he was in favor of "instant checks at gun shows just like at gun stores and pawn shops." But then he described as "unreasonable" nine aspects of the key legislation being pushed by Democrats at the time, led by Sen. Frank Lautenberg (D-N.J.).  Essentially, he opposed the entire Lautenberg bill as "made-for-TV lawmaking"—and the NRA lobbied hard against it. But it also ran an ad campaign in newspapers titled "Be Reasonable" that reprinted LaPierre's testimony. If you read his testimony, you will see that the crux of it is that existing laws must be better enforced — exactly the same position the NRA takes today.  Also, note that LaPierre uses the modifier "instant" before the word "checks." That subtle word choice became important later in the debate.  In the legislative process, Lautenberg's proposal to expand background checks was increasingly weakened (the Internet was excluded, for instance) but when it came for a vote, it passed by 51-50, with Vice President Al Gore casting the deciding vote. The victory actually came about because one senator, Democrat Max Cleland of Georgia, changed his vote at the last minute after another school shooting the day of the vote in his home state.  That legislation did not have to meet the 60-vote hurdle that this week's gun amendment needed to achieve, so in some ways it was a less impressive victory. Still, at the time, it was viewed as a seminal moment. "This is a turning point for our country," Gore declared.  But the NRA was just biding its time. The 51-50 vote on May 20,1999, turned out to be a Pyrrhic victory for gun-control advocates, similar to the successful vote earlier this month to proceed to debate on the gun amendments.  When the House of Representatives took up the issue the following month, the NRA worked with a longtime supporter, Rep.
FANS fear ISIS may be using a British fashion blogger as bait for a terror attack on London…TODAY.  YOUTUBE CONCERN: Marina Joyce in her latest Youtube video  Marina Joyce, 19, reviews clothing via her Youtube channel. But conspiracy theorists have noticed worrying signs in some of her recent videos – and a mysterious Twitter invite to join her for a "party" in Bethnal Green, east London. The hashtag #savemarinajoyce started trending across the world overnight and the Met Police have been inundated with calls of concern. The bizarre situation comes in the wake of a series of horrific terror attacks and mass killings across Europe – and a chilling new Islamic State warning of attacks on the UK capital.  TWITTER/@MARINAJOYCE7 POSE: Marina posts photos and videos on social media  "This is too coincidental" @KaneStunts In Marina's latest Youtube video (below) from July 22 – entitled "Date Outfit Ideas" – she appears distracted, wide-eyed and nervous. She keeps looking off camera and at one point a finger comes into shot – as if someone is telling her exactly what to do. Between 12 and 14 seconds into the video, it sounds as if she whispers: "help me".  In one previous video what appears to be a gun can clearly be seen in the background. Fans have been expressing concern for Marina's welfare over the past few days. But a tweet from her in the early hours of Wednesday morning sent netizens into panic. The vlogger wrote: "Meet me Bethnal Green at 6.30am if you would like to join partying with me at that event. "Bring a friend so you don't get lost."  TWITTER MYSTERIOUS: Marina's tweet, inviting people to Bethnal Green today  The hottest girls on Instagram You may not have heard of them before, but these girls are the HOTTEST women on Instagram. With millions of followers, see the girls who are taking social media by storm! 1 / 30  Munich shooter Ali Sonboly lured children to their deaths by inviting them for free McDonalds – only for him to gun them down in cold blood. Some Twitter users fear someone has taken control of Marina's account and is using her as bait for a terror plot. User @KaneStunts shared tweets warning of a new terror attack on London with the post: "This is too coincidental, do not go to Bethnal Green tomorrow." Another Twitter user, @trappedjai wrote: "I'm honestly crying right now. "Please everyone stay safe. "I'm begging everyone to stay home."  TWITTER/@MARINAJOYCE7 CREEPY: Marina and friends in 'Lolita' dresses  TWITTER CONCERN: People tweet their fears about the Bethnal Green meet up  TWITTER KILLER: Munich shooter Ali Sonboly  People have been quick to point out a number of violent incidents around Bethnal Green. A 13-year-old was shot in Bethnal Green in April. One showbiz journalist, Joshua Fox, who lives in Bethnal Green even felt compelled to go out and look around the area.  TWITTER POLICE: Showbiz journalist Joshua Fox even called police  But the Daily Star Online may be able to explain away the Tweet. Marina previously shared a link to a Facebook event for a morning, alcohol-free rave in London, called Morning Gloryville – which starts at 6.30am. It appears Marina may have just been inviting fans to come and dance with her.  FACEBOOK ADVERT: The Facebook ad for Morning Gloryville – a morning rave in London  Concern for Marina's wellbeing was so great overnight that the Daily Star Online can reveal the police has been out to check on her wellbeing. She already tweeted that she was OK back on Monday – but her fans continued to express concern. Police have visited her at home and confirmed she is safe and well.  TWITTER REASSURANCE: Marina Joyce tweets that she is OK to fans  TWITTER PHEW: Enfield police have confirmed Marina is OK
I have always wanted to go Petra. When I was finally planning on my travel to Jordan for this, I could not help but mix it up with some of the other countries nearby.  Are you an Indian traveller, who is tired of all the visa interviews that we have to do? Better, visit these 10 countries where we don't need an advance visa at all!  Egypt was a given, despite all the protests that have been rocking the country recently. And then, the tough call was taking a trip to Israel, which was kind of the link that connects Egypt to Jordan. There were plenty of pros & cons of going to Israel, and I considered them all.  On the negative side, I knew that the Israeli visa stamp was going to cause me a lot of problems in the future, especially since I travel a lot to Malaysia and Indonesia. On paper, both the countries are tolerant to Israel visa stamps. But in reality, you could get stopped and questioned for long hours if you have an Israeli visa stamp.  Regarding the Israeli visa stamp, everybody I meet keeps telling me that I don't have to be worried about it, because at Israel immigration, they will stamp the entry on a separate piece of paper. And I have to keep explaining to every single one of those people, that a visa and an entry stamp are two different things. I am aware that I can get the entry stamp on a separate piece of paper, but there is no way that I will get my visa on a separate piece of paper.  But on the bright side, I have been fascinated by Jerusalem for long. And one of my favourite couch-surfing friends lives in Tel Aviv, and I do not have to pay a dime for staying with her. And thirdly, the Israeli side of the Dead sea is much more cheaper than the Jordanian side.  So, having made up my mind, I went to the Israeli consulate website, and figured out all the documents required for the visa. And off I went one fine monday, for the visa application.  Right at the security who scanned my laptop bags, I was discouraged. When I informed him that I was backpacking, he suggested that I purchase a packaged tour, or I will not get my visa. I brushed this aside, and went in for my visa application. Provided all my documents to the female interviewer who was getting more annoying by the second. And the communication after that was mind-blowingly stupid.   The Interview   Interviewer: Are you travelling from Singapore to Tel Aviv  Me: No. From Singapore to Cairo and from Cairo to Tel Aviv.  Interviewer: Ok. I need the ticket copy from Singapore to Cairo, and from Cairo to Tel Aviv.  Me: No problem. (And I gave them)  Interviewer: And you are flying back from Tel Aviv to Singapore?  Me: No. I cross to Jordan via the Allenby bridge, and then my return flight is from Jordan to Singapore. (I give my return tickets as well)  Interviewer: But we also need your bus tickets from Tel Aviv to Jordan.  Me: That would be impossible. Egged allows me to book buses only 6 days before the journey, and it is still 30 days away for my trip. (Egged is the local bus carrier. At this point, I had the feeling that I was pissing her off)  Interviewer: Where will you be travelling in Israel.  Me: 2 days in Tel Aviv, and then 2 days in Jerusalem.  Interviewer: Where are you staying in Israel?  Me: At a friend's residence. (Gives the name, address and phone number of my friend).  Interviewer: Your friend is Israeli? How did you meet her?  Me: In Singapore. She was travelling here, and stayed with me.  Interviewer: What is the relationship between you and your friend?  Me: When you say 'you and your friend', I think the relationship is rather obvious. (Ok, we are both equally pissed now at each other!)  Interviewer: But why would she let her stay with you?  Me: Because I let her stay with me. And what else are friend's for?  Interviewer: Ok, you are an Indian living in Singapore. You have your own accommodation here?  Me: Yes.  Interviewer: Ok, I need a copy of your lease contract for your house to prove that you have a proper residence here. And I need a copy of the lease contract for your friend's house in Israel, to prove that she has a proper residence there.  Me: What??  Interviewer: (She wasn't done yet). And I need a written guarantee letter from your friend stating that you will be staying with her, and she will be responsible for anything that happens during your stay in Israel
Before US-president Donald Trump officially takes the office, he has to disclose all his financial records, personally divest from the Trump Organization and its affiliates, and place all his assets in a blind trust, Democratic ranking member of the US House of Representatives Foreign Affairs Committee Eliot Engel, said in a press release.  © REUTERS / Mike Segar US Lawmaker Concerned About Reports of Trump Running Business After Election Win  WASHINGTON (Sputnik) — President-elect Donald Trump should immediately disclosure financial information to the American people, put his assets into a blind trust and divest from the Trump organization, Engel said on Tuesday.  Engel noted the approach is the only way to satisfy the public's concerns about serious conflicts between the president-elect and his overseas business interests.  "Now, weeks before he is set to take the oath of office, the president-elect must demonstrate to the American people that he is not using the power of his presidency to enhance his business interests," Engel suggested.  The press release listed several potential conflicts which have surfaced in the two weeks since the 2016 presidential election, including Trump's daughter, who is the next head of the Trump Organization joining a meeting with the Japanese Prime Minister, and a phone call with the Argentinian President.  Engel also said as part of his job on the Foreign Affairs Committee, he will work to find out how deep Trump's conflicts of interest are, and ensure they do not interfere with the national security of the United States.
Nikcy Perian has announced that Kokua is to fork development between Second Life and OpenSim.  While both versions of the viewer will operate on either OpenSim or Second Life for the immediate future, due to an increasing numbers of issues the viewer has been experiencing in connecting to OpenSim-based grids as a result of recent SL-specific updates, the two will diverge over time, each focusing on fixes and updates specific to the gird type to which they are intended to connect.  Commenting on the move in a blog post accompanying the release of version 3.7.8.35024, Nicky states:  The release of Kokua.3.7.12 exposed some vulnerabilities of having one viewer handle both environments. The problem with Kokua-3.7.12 was that it could log on and perform well on some OpenSim grids but, would hang and then crash on others. Particularly troublesome was that it would crash on a standalone instance built from opensim git Master , OpenSim's development track. Also, as reported by Inara Pey LindenLab is moving to content delivery network (CDN) for Meshes and Textures and plans drop UDP portocol once CDN is adopted. I suspect there will be a delay while the OpenSim core developers determine how best to approach those changes.  The comment relating to the Lab's plans to introduce a CDN solution for texture and mesh fetching (and possibly more in the future), is interesting, as it also applies to those other TPVs which span both OpenSim and Second Life in terms of how they handle the changes as the progress (will they attempt to retain the UDP legacy code once the Lab start to remove it from their core code base? Will they also opt to fork?). As Nicky points out; there is also the question as to how the OpenSim core developers respond to the Lab's move, and whether CDN capabilities will be added as an option for those grids as can afford it, or whether grids themselves might opt to add supporting code, depending on their needs and the perceived benefits.  Kokua 3.7.8.35024  In the meantime, and alongside the announcement, Kokua have released version 3.7.8.35024 for OpenSim. The version number reflects the fact that the more recent code releases from the Lab (3.7.9 AIS v3 updates; 3.7.10 – SL Share 2; 3.7.11 – Snowstorm contributions: and 3.7.12 – Maintenance release quick fixes) have all been removed from the viewer, leaving it based on the 3.7.7 (interest list updates) and the 3.7.8 (Maintenance fixes) Linden code.  To assist those using Kokua on both OpenSim and Second Life, the OpenSim version of Kokua will (under Windows) install separately to the SL version – I assume the same is possible with the Mac and Linux versions, allowing for the differences in how software is installed on those platforms. This means that once the differences between the two versions of Kokua become more apparent, users will be able to move between them when logging between SL and OpenSim with relative ease.  In addition, the OpenSim release includes the following updates (please refer to the release notes for full attributions):  The chat text entry bar has tinted background based of the type of conversation. Nearby chat remains as white. The rest of the chat types are: IM sessions are tinted red Group chat sessions are tinted green Conference sessions are tinted blue  Added the following to the avatar context menu: Remove friend Grant or revoke permissions granted to a friend (see when you're online, map you, etc) – only visible when clicking on a friend   Added the grant/revoke friend permissions sub-menu to the People floater right-click context menu (only visible when clicking on a friend's name)  Added localhost Win Grid Proxy 127.0.0.1:8080 and localhost Local Grid 127.0.0.1:8002 to the default drop down list; also added Tangle Grid to the default grid selection.  Kokua 3.7.12.34831  Released on July 15th (and which I thought I'd written about at the time – my sincere apologies to Nicky) includes the changes noted above, and the additional LL code base updates (3.7.9-3.7.12) as listed above. Additional highlights for the release include (please refer to the release blog post for proper accreditation):  New Preferences option to display your avatar name and grid display in the program title bar (Preferences > Kokua – note these changes should only be set after logging-in; if set from the log-in splash screen, they will crash the viewer)  Received Items folder now displays as a system folder in Inventory
Do you find it irritating having to set up an ad blocker on your computer web browsers, smart phones, and tablets? I sure do. And then there are some 'smart' devices at home that don't appear to have ad blocking software of any kind. Well, I learned about Pi-hole which is ad blocking software for your pi board and it blocks all the advertisements on your home network before they get to your various devices. It gives you the ability to black list or white list any domain, plus it has a great dashboard that gives you insights into your home network's most accessed domains/web sites, most active devices, and most frequent advertisers.  Pi-hole was really targeted to run on the Raspberry Pi but I wanted to know if it would work on my inexpensive Orange Pi running Armbian Linux. Well, it absolutely does! Below is my process for getting Pi-hole up and running quickly.  Installing Pi-hole  Installing Pi-hole is done using the terminal, so open a terminal on your Orange Pi's desktop or ssh into the pi board.  You will be downloading the software, so navigate to a directory of your choosing, making sure that you have write privileges. Like this:  cd <your preferred directory>/  I deviated from the "one command" installation on the Pi-hole home page. I mean, they do say right underneath that command that "piping to bash can be dangerous" and that a local install is "safer." So, here's my local installation steps:  git clone --depth 1 https://github.com/pi-hole/pi-hole.git Pi-hole cd Pi-hole/automated\ install/ ./basic-install.sh  If you are not logged in as the root user, then the basic-install script will prompt you to enter your password before continuing. If needed, the script will download and install some prerequisite Linux packages. Then it'll provide you with a simple blue/red graphical interface, prompting you to answer a few questions about how you want Pi-hole configured. In my experience, simply accepting the defaults was fine and I later discovered that the Pi-hole web application enables you to change settings like DNS provider.  The script will tell you what the password is for Pi-hole both in the graphical interface and in the terminal. Do take note of that password!  The script will also tell you the web address for Pi-hole, which should be like this:  http://<your pi's IP address>/admin  or even something like:  http://orangepipc/admin  You will need enter your Pi-hole password, and then you should get a nice dashboard that looks something like this:  Remember to change the DNS setting on your home network router so it that uses the address of your pi board. Otherwise, the ads won't be filtered!  The instructions above are more or less the same as the alternative "safe" method as provided by the Pi-hole web site despite the fact that Armbian is not listed as an officially supported operating system. I believe that these instructions should work on a Raspberry Pi or other pi board running some form of Debian based Linux operating system. However, I haven't tested that and I would be interested to hear your experience (just drop me a brief comment, please).   Thoughts and Observations  After running Pi-hole for a while an studying the information in the Pi-hole dashboard, I found that there was a lot more network activity going on than I was aware of, not all of which did I approve of. For example, there were some 'interesting' connections going out from my kid's devices related to game apps that I wonder about, plus social networking apps were apparently sending some data continuously which bothered me. Altogether, whether it was benign traffic or not, I was glad to reduce the traffic load even if by a little…I mean, why should I be content to allow apps and ads to eat up my network traffic for things I don't want or care about? Well, now they are blocked. Period.  Setting up an Orange Pi for ad blocking like this is cheap, easy, and helps to put my mind at ease about limiting some unwanted traffic to/from my home network (especially where the kids are involved). If you are interested, you can see my previous post about how to easily setting up an Orange Pi and check out how cheap the Orange Pis are at the links below. I believe that it is a worthwhile investment.  Orange Pi on Amazon (affiliate link): Orange Pi PC Single Board Computer Quad Core ARM Cortex-A7 1GB DDR3 4K Decode  EDIT: The irony of this post is that if you successfully set up Pi-hole, then affiliate links on this site (s.click.aliexpress.com) gets blocked. White list that
Polling Locations  For a complete list of polling locations please click on the link below. If you need to know where you vote and what precinct you are, please visit the Voter Information Center.  Polling Locations
Part 2 of this review can be found here: https://llco.org/dissent-science-and-a-healthy-world2/  Dissent, science, and a healthy world: comments on Judith Shapiro's Mao's War Against Nature (2001) Part 1 of 2  (llco.org)  Mao's War Against Nature (Cambridge University Press, 2010) by Judith Shapiro was published a decade ago. Even though the book is problematic in many ways, the issues that it raises are more important than ever. Since its publication, the ecological crisis caused by global capitalism has only gotten worse. There are only so many resources to go around. Capitalism has created a system where people in the First World get more than their fair share at the expense of people in the Third World, and at the expense of the Earth itself. Capitalism has created a system that not only consigns the vast majority of humanity in the Third World to incredible poverty and oppression, but also a system that is unsustainable ecologically. I once attended a campaign rally many years ago, Elaine Brown, ex-Black Panther Party celebrity and then-current Green Party activist, informed her audience that she sought a system in which everyone, presumably both in the First and Third Worlds, could be millionaires. The proposition, like many idealist fantasies, was met with applause despite the obvious problems such a solution to the world's problems would entail. How would this super-mall economy of the nouveau riche materialize? Who would toil away to produce the goods? Who would staff the mall? The current system is unsustainable as it is, imagine how unsustainable it would be if First Worldist rhetoric were realized and every human being was somehow magically granted the leisurely, consumerist lifestyle, opportunities and way of life of the American nouveau riche. Even continuing as it has, civilization itself is headed for ecological catastrophe. Not only does capitalism steal the livelihood and dignity of the vast majority in the Third World, but it threatens the future of much of the life on Earth. The Earth weeps. The masses cry out for an alternative. The need for total revolution, for new socialism and Leading Light Communism, has never been greater. The need for Leading Light, the most advanced scientific leadership becomes greater every passing day. Shapiro's book convincingly shows that the past attempt at an alternative, at socialism, at reaching communism, in China was flawed in important ways. Shapiro shows that errors abounded in the Maoist revolution's approach to intellectual dissent, green science and to the natural world. According to Shapiro, despite its pseudo-scientific pretense, the Maoist ideal to control, to dominate, to micromanage, almost every aspect of the intellectual and natural world to better serve human interests often ended in disasters that worked against both the interests of humans and the environment. The revolution, says Shapiro, veered to unscientific extremes due to Maoist fanaticism:  "Our story begins not in the physical world but in the political one — with a struggle among human beings. In the summer of 1957, just a few years after the 1949 Communist victory, hundreds of thousands of China's most distinguished scholars and scientists were criticized, harshly punished, ostracized, and silenced in an 'Anti-rightist movement.' By destroying those who sought simply to perform the Chinese intellectual's traditional duty to speak out in order to assist the country's leaders to govern better. China deprived itself of authoritative voices that might have cautioned against foolhardy schemes that ultimately destroyed the natural environment. People from many levels of society contributed to the events that will be described in the coming pages. However, as we shall see, Mao played a leading role in launching the Anti-rightist movement, as he did in numerous subsequent decisions that affected China's environment for the worse." (Shapiro 21)  Shapiro does not hide her distaste for the Maoist regime. She often fails to distinguish between very different trends within the regime. She lets it be known that she is not a fellow traveler or sympathizer with the Maoist project. She has no love of Maoism or the Cultural Revolution. If Shapiro had to pick a side during the line struggles within the Communist Party in the last decade of Mao's life, Shapiro would opt for revisionism and capitalism, even Western liberalism. Even so, her criticisms can be a starting place for our own revolutionary self-criticism over errors that occurred in those years. The Maoist history is our own. Their victories are our own, so too are their defeats. It is our burden to provide answers to the masses, to ultimately explain why socialism in China was defeated. These errors, both the demand to micromanage dissent and the natural world, ultimately aided the counter-revolutionaries in China, and also in the Soviet Union. Rather than ignore the kinds of problems Shapiro raises, we should use her work as an opportunity to examine ourselves. We must dissect the past attempts at social transformation in
MSNBC is at it yet again, slandering conservatives wishing to protect the religious liberties of business owners as "anti-gay" bigots.  The latest example comes with the headline for Adam Serwer's March 21 story, "Georgia Republicans tack anti-gay amendments onto unrelated bills." To his credit, Serwer himself avoided needless invective, giving a rather fair description of the controversy at hand, even though it was a bit paltry in space devoted to those favoring the legislation. What's more, Serwer seemed rather incurious as to how the average Georgian feels about corporate interests -- you know, the bad guys in the eyes of the Left when they favor tax cuts and other pro-business moves -- being a significant factor in scotching the bill (emphasis mine):  A last minute attempt by Republicans in Georgia to pass an Arizona-style religious freedom bill failed Thursday, after the sponsor withdrew the proposal.  Georgia Republican State Senator Josh McKoon attempted to attach the measure to two unrelated bills in the state legislature, hoping to get the controversial measure passed on the last day of the session. McKoon said on Twitter that he had backed off after "opposition from large moneyed special interests."  "It's the exact same legislation that was going around the nation that [Arizona Republican Governor] Jan Brewer vetoed," said Bryan Long, executive director of the liberal advocacy group Better Georgia. "It would allow a business in Georgia not to serve anyone as long as they have a religious reason to do that."  The amendments, put forth by McKoon, are similar to legislation proposed by conservative state lawmakers across the country designed to make it easier to claim religious exemptions to laws that "substantially burden" religious belief. If a business refused to serve a customer for religious reasons or grant an employee certain benefits they might otherwise be eligible for, the proposal would also make it easier for the person to defend themselves in court by claiming that doing so would impair their ability to practice their faith. The proposals have been spurred in part by incidents in states where business owners have been unable to claim religious exemptions to state laws banning discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. Georgia does not have a state law banning such discrimination.  After Brewer vetoed a similar bill in Arizona, and Georgia lawmakers got an earful from business groups in the state like Delta and Coca-Cola, the Georgia version of the legislation appeared to have been left for dead by Republican leaders in the House.  Pro-LGBT rights activists discovered Thursday that McKoon had added amendments to bills related to unemployment insurance, one of which would deny benefits to public school workers during the summer. As of Thursday evening however, McKoon had withdrawn his amendment from one bill and said that the other one was unlikely to come up.  Since this is the last day of the session, the proposal is dead for the year. It would have been the first such victory for religious conservatives, who have otherwise failed to get any such laws passed in nearly half a dozen states.  Ironically McKoon, the sponsor of the Georgia proposal, had introduced a separate bill in January that would have prevented lawmakers from voting on legislation introduced at the last minute.  "It winds up producing bad public policy," McKoon said at the time.
Close  US Internet revealed that it has launched the fastest Internet connection in the world to the city of Minneapolis, Minnesota. While the verification of the claim is difficult, the connection is definitely the fastest broadband connection being offered in the United States.  US Internet is offering a 10 Gbps fiber connection to residents and businesses within its coverage area, as the company is based just to the west of Minneapolis.  The 10 Gbps speed of the broadband connection, which will be for both downloading an uploading, is over 300 times faster compared to the average connection speeds in the United States, which is currently 30 Mbps according to Ookla.  Verizon and Google are both testing 10 Gbps connection speeds, but neither company has made the technology available to consumers. It seems that US Internet has beaten both major tech companies in introducing the breakthrough technology, albeit to a very limited market.  "With our new fiber network, we have redefined what is considered broadband Internet and taken our speed capabilities to next-gen levels, resulting in the fastest Internet service the world has ever seen for home users," said US Internet co-CEO Joe Caldwell.  The 10 Gbps connection will not come cheap though, as the service will cost a monthly fee of $399. This is a significant increase compared to the next option for US Internet customers, which is a 1 Gbps fiber connection for $65 per month.  However, for customers living in Minneapolis, the only other options for Internet providers are Comcast and Century Link, both of which do not offer connections anywhere near as fast as what US Internet is offering. Both companies don't offer fiber connections at all.  Customers included in the coverage area that are willing to pay for the massive Internet speed upgrade will have to wait though. The technology being used for the 10 Gbps connection is fiber technology, homes and buildings are required to be wired in a unique way, as the connection is not as simple as plugging in wires to a box.  The issue lies in the installation process of the fiber technology due to the frozen ground of the city, which is where the fiber wire needs to pass through. According to US Internet, orders for 10 Gbps connections may only be completed by Spring of 2015 when the frozen ground thaws. The company added that connection requests not completed due to the frozen ground will receive priority one Spring comes around.  This means that currently, only US Internet customers already on the 1 Gbps fiber connection can immediately access 10 Gbps speeds.  The wait seems to be worth it though, as Caldwell likens the upgrade to "going from 30 to 10,000 miles per hour."  See Now: 30 Gadgets And Tech Gifts For Father's Day 2018 That Dad Will Think Are Rad  ⓒ 2018 TECHTIMES.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.
Senegal have been disqualified from the 2013 Africa Cup of Nations after a riot forced the abandonment of Saturday's home tie with Ivory Coast.  It is not yet clear whether the Confederation of African Football will take further action against Senegal.  The match in Dakar was called off after 74 minutes, with Ivory Coast 2-0 up on the night and 6-2 ahead on aggregate.  Caf has officially confirmed the result as a 2-0 win for Ivory Coast, sending them through to next year's tournament.  Senegal manager Ferdinand Coly said on Sunday that "Senegal will accept the sanctions". He also apologised to Ivory Coast.  Trouble flared after striker Didier Drogba scored his side's second goal from the penalty spot.  Visiting supporters were forced to leap down on to the pitch to escape as violence erupted, with home fans throwing missiles, stones, bottles and firecrackers.  Ivorian players took refuge in the centre circle while the security forces used tear gas to disperse the rioting fans.  The match was suspended for 40 minutes while police tried to restore order but the referee was forced to call off the second-leg, final-round qualifier.  Caf says its decision to ban Senegal is in accordance with the provisions of article 16 paragraph 20 of their regulations of the competition, which states:  "If the referee is forced to stop the match before the end of the regular time because of invasion of the field or aggression against the visiting team, the host team shall be considered loser and shall be eliminated from the competition, without prejudice to the sanctions existing in the regulations."  Ivory Coast had already been included in Monday's seedings draw for the 2013 Nations Cup, which will be held in South Africa between 19 January and 10 February.
In late March, a dispute settlement panel of the World Trade Organization (WTO) found China's rare earth element (REE) export regulations to be in violation of trade rules and deemed them to be an attempt to "secure preferential use" for domestic firms and to attract foreign investment. The ruling, which China is likely to challenge by May, has already been dismissed as "irrelevant" by the Chinese REE industry, perhaps reflecting the fact that China is the world's largest consumer of REEs in addition to being the largest producer.  In fact, China's holds key techno-economic advantages across the REE value chain that has actually led to emerging foreign mines becoming dependent on it for growth, especially at a time when REE prices have fallen dramatically from their 2011 highs. At the moment it is difficult for any single country to challenge China's advantage in this sphere and the lack of forward movement in India-Japan cooperation hasn't helped matters.  The WTO investigation launched in 2012 in response to a case filed by the United States and subsequently supported by the European Union and Japan has concluded that "China's export quotas were designed to achieve industrial policy goals" rather than to limit environmental damage as Beijing had argued in support of its use of export taxes, quotas, and the right to choose as to which companies get to export. The EU trade commissioner, Karel De Gucht, naturally pleased with the ruling, has said that "China cannot use export restrictions to protect its own industries or give them a helping hand on the global market at the expense of foreign competitors." While the EU's enthusiasm for the ruling is understandable, given that it has staked the revival of its manufacturing sector on "clean" high-tech products that nevertheless use dirty-to-mine REEs for which it has no domestic source; within the Chinese REE industry itself the ruling has ruffled few feathers.  The Chinese REE sector in the last two years has become so inward looking that it hasn't actually even met the restrictive export quotas put in place by the Chinese government. Just after the announcement of export curbs by the Chinese in 2010, many foreign users resorted to stockpiling rare earths (often through smuggled imports from China). But by 2011 itself, relatively high stockpiles in foreign countries coupled with the global economic slowdown served to dampen foreign demand for Chinese REEs.  This happened even as China's Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT) moved to weed out illegal mining while consolidating the domestic REE sector, which alongside Baotou Steel Rare-Earth Hi-Tech Co Ltd consists of a number of small firms scattered across the country. In any case, the crash in international prices post-2011 made REE smuggling out of China a far less lucrative proposition than before and competition within the domestic market remains fierce.  Now domestic REE volume demand in China itself has remained strong (although prices remain depressed) given that the country today is also a key player in REE using intermediate industries, besides producing 85 percent of the world's REE supply and holding around half the world's known reserves of same. For instance, China today is home to three-quarters of global production of neodymium-iron-boron permanent magnets. Beyond permanent magnets, China has a strong position in REE-using intermediate industries such as glass, phosphors, catalysts for oil refining, batteries and catalytic converters.  Chinese competitiveness in REE-based intermediates ultimately draws on its cost advantages in upstream processing. China is currently unmatched in cost terms in its ability to separate rare earth oxides (REOs) from concentrates as well as in being able to refine and fabricate REOs into usable metal and metallic alloys that feed intermediate industries. China's advantage in the processing domain is so pronounced that one of the two big projects that came online after its move to curb exports in 2010, the re-started Mountain Pass mine in California owned by Molycorp, actually sends REE concentrates to China for processing. Moreover, Molycorp acquired NEO Material Technologies in 2012, which has most of its manufacturing units for permanent magnets in China operating as joint ventures with Chinese state-owned enterprises. Incidentally, state-owned China Non-Ferrous Metal Mining (Group) made a failed bid in 2009 to acquire Lynas, which operates the Mount Weld mine in Australia, the other non-Chinese major project in operation today.  All of which points to the significant advantage China holds in the REE domain: a competitive presence across the entire REE value chain in addition to very well surveyed and cost-effective mines. This integrated network means that China's mines already have financing and offtake agreements in place, which provide them with a buffer as they look to build towards peak output. On the other hand, the current low prices for REEs across the world mean that very few new mines are being seen as investment worthy, especially in the absence of joint ventures with downstream players for processing and offtake arrangements. 
Details have emerged of the first conversation between US President-elect Donald Trump and Theresa May, the British Prime Minister.  In an exchange that astounded some political observers in the UK, Mr Trump told Mrs May: "If you travel to the US, you should let me know," seemingly oblivious to the months of preparation that go into an official visit, not to mention the usual diplomatic protocols.  The details emerged after a transcript of the call was leaked to the Times newspaper in the UK.  The Times reported that the "informality of the invitation raised eyebrows among British officials", while The Independent said Mr Trump's "extraordinarily casual phrase" was said to have "stunned civil servants".
Cisco Stock Forecast: Executive Summary  New Possible M&A Deal  Software Release Improves ACI  Year End Predictions  I Know First algorithm is currently bullish on Cisco  US only revenue grew 6% Y/Y in 1Q16. Cisco's TSS (Technical support services) revenue declined by 1% Y/Y in 1Q16, while Advanced services grew 9% Y/Y. Overall, Cisco reported switching revenue growth of 5% Y/Y in 1Q16. Adjusted for storage, switching revenue growth was 7% Y/Y up from 2% in 4Q15.  Once again, "Catalyst" one of their core products, was the main driver in sales. Catalyst + Old Nexus grew 8% Q/Q in FQ1'16 vs. 5% last year. Cisco said that sales from the Cat 3850, Cat 3650 and Nexus 9300 grew in the fixed-switching category, Total Fixed-switching revenue grew 10% Y/Y to ~$2.75bn.  Cisco Shows Interest In Acano  Cisco announced its intent to acquire Acano, a privately held company based in London that provides collaboration infrastructure and conferencing software, for $700m. Acano's hardware and software includes gateways, and video and audio bridging technology that allows customers to connect video systems from multiple vendors across both cloud and hybrid environments. Acano's technology and expertise would enable Cisco to accelerate development in the areas of interoperability and scalability. Customers would be able to connect from anywhere, a browser on a mobile device to the corporate boardroom.  Source: Google Images  Acano, founded in 2012 has grew at surprising rates, with 170 employees to date, the company grew more than 600% in 2014, and is on track to double its revenues in 2015 as reported by its vice president of sales in July. Cisco will pay $700m in cash and assumed equity awards, plus additional retention based incentives for Acano employees who join Cisco, the transaction is expected to close in Q316. It is also to be noted that Acano has many important customers such as Vodafone, AT&T, Whole Foods and others, which would be moved on to Cisco.  New Software Release  Cisco announced a new software release that enhances ACI with micro-segmentation for both physical and multivendor virtualized applications (on VMW VDS and Hyper-V), and extends ACI across multi-site environments. By virtue of the new capabilities to ACI, the latter now supports automated service insertion for any third party layer 4-7 services. On top of the new software, Cisco also implemented new integration of Dockers. Cisco released new support for cloud automation tools like VMware vRealize Automation and OpenStack, including open standards- based Opflex support with OVS. New members of the ACI ecosystem enable the automation of entire application suites, including PAAS and SAAS, helping organizations to automate across their application and infrastructure teams.  In the press release, Cisco said that it now has more than 5000 N9K ACI-ready customers. This implies that with the new software release, Cisco has pre-sold their product. If the new ACI software is successful and customers are satisfied, this could be a new catalyst in Cisco's potential growth.  1-Month Chart  Source: Google Finance  Valuation  Our Dec-16 price target for Cisco is $36. Our price target is based on a ~16x multiple to our 2016YE EPS forecast of $2.25. The company continues to deliver strong results across their business.  Algorithmic Analysis  I Know First supplies financial services, mainly through stock forecasts via their predictive algorithm. The algorithm incorporates a 15-year database, and utilizes it to predict the flow of money across 7,000 assets. The self-learning algorithm uses artificial intelligence, predictive models based on artificial neural networks, and genetic algorithms to predict money movements within various markets.  The algorithm produces a forecast with a signal and a predictability indicator. The signal is the number in the middle of the box. The predictability is the number at the bottom of the box. At the top, a specific asset is identified. This format is consistent across all predictions. The middle number is indicative of strength and direction, not a price target. The bottom number, the predictability, signifies a confidence level.  Having explained how I Know First's algorithm works, it is worthwhile to see if the algorithm agrees with the bullish fundamental analysis of the company. The three-month and one-year forecasts for Cisco are included.  The stock has a bullish signal for both, indicating that the stock is currently undervalued. Over the predicted time horizons, the stock is currently undervalued, which is in support of the fundamental analysis.  Conclusion  We have a fundamentally Bullish
Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption Bilal came to the UK as a 15-year-old asylum seeker  The number of asylum seeking children in the care of English councils has risen 62% in a year.  The largest group are boys aged 16 and 17, coming from countries such as Afghanistan or Eritrea.  A refugee charity says many children are facing "serious shortages" in legal advice to help them make their case to stay.  The Home Office said it had increased funding to cover the costs of care and other support for unaccompanied minors.  Figures released to the BBC England data unit under the Freedom of Information Act reveal at least 104 councils were caring for more unaccompanied minors than they were in 2015.  There were at least 4,156 children seeking asylum without parents or guardians and cared for by 147 councils on 31 March 2016, compared with 2,569 the year before. The figure is likely to be higher as some councils did not have up to date figures and some would only say they had fewer than five such children.  The BBC's findings coincide with a report by the children's charity, Unicef, which has called on the government to do more to help unaccompanied children driven from their homes by conflict.  Unaccompanied minors made up about 8% of all asylum claims in the UK in 2015.  For more stories from the BBC England data unit follow our Pinterest board.  Image caption Bilal was cared for from the age of 15  'Every single minute I missed my family'  Bilal is 22 years old and is now a passionate Leicester City supporter. He arrived from Afghanistan as an unaccompanied child, aged 15. The police handed him over to social services in Warwickshire.  "Every single minute I was missing my family," Bilal said.  "I tried to make myself busy with football, games, making friends.  "My English family tried to make me happy. When I tried to cry, they'd take me to the playground or to football.  "Before I'd cry, I'd try to busy myself. It was not easy."  He was initially fostered by an English family, then moved to Leicester, where he went to secondary school, and he still lives in the city. He is in the process of applying to settle in the UK permanently.  Yet he urges other refugees to think carefully about the journey.  "We were in a small boat for 10 to 15 people," he recalled. "It took three or four hours to Greece. It was massive water. If someone was coming now I'd tell them 'stop, it's not easy'. So many people are dying."  Bilal said Leicester was now his home.  "If I go anywhere I say I'm from Leicester, originally from Afghanistan."  The data shows Kent County Council, which includes the Port of Dover, now cares for more than one in five of England's unaccompanied minors.  It is followed by Croydon, which is where the UK's asylum screening unit is based and where asylum seekers must present themselves if they have already reached the UK.  Others in the top 10 include Northamptonshire.  A spokesman for its county council said: "Geographically, it is often the first place that lorries stop to take a break after coming in from the ports and there are a large number of lorry stops, the M1, A45 and A43 as well as warehouses and logistics companies."  Duty of care to young adults  When a child claims asylum in the UK they become the legal responsibility of the local authority in which they are discovered. Local authorities receive funding from the Home Office to look after these children and they are usually either placed into foster care or "semi-independent living" situations.  Councils' responsibility to looked after children does not end when they turn 18.  In Northamptonshire, there were 147 children 17 and under seeking asylum. However it was also working with a further 94 care leavers aged up to 24.  A spokesman for Northamptonshire County Council said there was often a shortfall between the government grant it receives and the costs.  Image copyright Getty Images Image caption The Refugee Council said there were "serious shortages" in legal advice for asylum seeking children  Judith Dennis, policy manager for the Refugee Council, said the UK received about 3% of asylum claims made by unaccompanied children in Europe.  "Around the world, more lone children than ever before have been forced to flee their countries," she said.  "These children arrive without their parents or guardians and have escaped countries where conflict, violence, or human rights abuses are rife.  "It's often a child's parents, not the child themselves, who take the decision that the situation is so dangerous that the child must be sent to safety." 
Amazon Studios said today that Stephen Root has landed the title role in The Man in the High Castle, its adaptation of Philip K. Dick's alt-history novel about life in the former United States after the Allied Powers lost World War II.  He'll play the mysterious figure tied to the Resistance movement who collects the enigmatic films that seem to depict alternate versions of reality — the ones the Japanese and Nazis want to find and destroy. Watch a clip of his character above.  Season 2, which starts streaming December 16, picks up with political tensions mounting between Germany and Japan. Juliana Crain (Alexa Davalos) facing the consequences of her decision to betray the Resistance and allow Joe Blake (Luke Kleintank), a suspected Nazi agent, to escape the Pacific States with a film originally bound for the Man in the High Castle. Joe returns a hero to the Reich and finds himself thrust into the Nazi capital of Berlin, face to face with the father who abandoned him. Meanwhile, Frank Frink (Rupert Evans) becomes increasingly radicalized and drawn further into the Resistance after seeing images of his own execution in the mysterious films. DJ Qualls, Joel de la Fuente, Brennan Brown, Bella Heathcote, Callum Keith Rennie, Cary-Hiroyuki Tagawa and Rufus Sewell co-star.  Veteran actor Root has appeared in dozens of films as Selma, Trumbo, Boardwalk Empire and Finding Dory and played Milton in the cult classic Office Space. His recent TV credits include Turn, Brooklyn Nine-Nine and voice roles in Adventure Time, Gravity Falls and Kung Fu Panda: Legends of Awesomeness.  The Man in the High Castle is executive produced by David Zucker and Isa Dick Hackett.
Not long ago, the summer suit came in two basic forms, both of them unappealing: a conservatively styled, tropical-weight wool that you couldn't wait to take off; or a cartoonishly old-fashioned style in, say, seersucker or linen that you could rarely muster the enthusiasm to put on.  Lately, though, designers have put the suit through some austerity measures and have come out with variations that feel lighter than ever before — and cool enough for even the most easily overheated.  "As an item, the summer suit didn't really exist before," said Alex Badia, the men's wear editor of Women's Wear Daily. "There was no such thing, really. Men hated linen because of the way it wrinkles, but fabric mills have started making linen blends with wool or silk that have this great texture and are amazingly lightweight. And designers are finally making suits that are unconstructed and unlined, and that travel well, too. You just fold them up and throw them in a suitcase. I sweat all summer long, but the suit is really a doable thing now."  What's more, many lines — notably, youth-oriented brands like Uniqlo, H & M, Club Monaco and Topman — are offering suits that put less pressure on the wallet as well, albeit in skinny fashion-forward cuts that might not suit the average city slicker. Even so, a neat, crisply styled khaki suit at J. Crew goes for $450, as do several other suits in the store, and it looks and feels like one that costs three times as much.  As do the sharp suits at Suitsupply, a stylish, modern haberdashery started a decade ago in the Netherlands by Fokke de Jong, who believed that the world of men's suiting deserved a platform more like an Apple store than a clichéd men's club. Offering inexpensive tailored suits in a natty range of fabrics suggestive of a 1960s Italian take on British style, Suitsupply has grown to nearly 40 shops in Europe and, recently, one in New York.  Not only does a less expensive suit cost less, it is also a far less precious thing. You might not bicycle to work in a $1,700 suit, but one that cost $450? When the cost of a suit is on par with a fancy dress shirt and a pair of premium jeans, the possibilities for wearing it open up considerably. Brunching! Gallery-going! Walking the dog! Even Mike Rowe, the hunky, muddy star of "Dirty Jobs," might wear one to work.  Moreover, it is not just where you can wear these new threads, it's how. As esoteric as it sounds, the men's suitscape is being subtly but seriously altered by the fact that more and more suits are now sold as separates.  Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You will receive emails containing news content , updates and promotions from The New York Times. You may opt-out at any time. You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Frank Muytjens, the head of men's design at J. Crew, said that the company never considered selling suits in the new Ludlow Shop that were "nested," the industry term for a suit that is displayed and sold as a single SKU, or stock-keeping unit, with one price tag. Freeing men to choose and buy the jackets and pants they want to put together makes them that much freer to exercise the same judgment at home.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  "Separates have become a huge key to the suit business," said Marshal Cohen, NPD's chief analyst. "Not long ago, breaking up a suit was a big no-no, but now guys want to break it up. They are looking to diversify their wardrobes more than ever, and they want a suit that lets them take the pants off after work and wear a pair of jeans with the jacket — even if they're changing in the car."  Anthony Purritano, a product development associate at Macy's Merchandising Group, bought two complete summer suits — that is, matching jacket and pants — at the Ludlow Shop. But he also bought two suit vests and a pair of suit pants without their matching elements. "I really like wearing a suit in summer, and these feel really lightweight and breathable," he said. "But I don't want to look like a mannequin. I like to play with the patterns and make it more unique."  Looking down, he added,
Related Information  Similar Players  Not the Dan Blackburn you're looking for? We have one other player with a similar name.  (b.1938) (NHL, WHA, WHL) [1957-1976]  League Information  Dan Blackburn played in four leagues over the course of his career. Learn more about them from these League History pages.  Team Information  If you would like to know more about any of the four teams that Dan Blackburn played for during his career, visit these Team History pages.
This page contains information about a Guild Wars 2 element, mechanic, or feature that has been removed or replaced.  The information on this page does not apply to the current version of the game or the content is no longer available.  The PvP Locker was an account-wide storage for PvP weapons, armor, sigils and runes as well as PvP crafting materials from launch until the April 15, 2014 update. It could effectively be used to exchange items between characters on the same account.  Collections [ edit ]  The PvP locker functioned like the collections tab of the Account Vault, except weapons, armor, and sigils do not stack.  This section contains:  Armor-Light (213 types)  Armor-Medium (207 types)  Armor-Heavy (213 types)  Cultural Armor-Light (90 types)  Cultural Armor-Medium (90 types)  Cultural Armor-Heavy (90 types)  Weapon-Axe (59 types)  Weapon-Dagger (55 types)  Weapon-Focus (51 types)  Weapon-Greatsword (55 types)  Weapon-Hammer (51 types)  Weapon-Harpoon Gun (44 types)  Weapon-Longbow (55 types)  Weapon-Mace (48 types)  Weapon-Pistol (48 types)  Weapon-Rifle (49 types)  Weapon-Scepter (53 types)  Weapon-Shield (61 types)  Weapon-Short Bow (57 types)  Weapon-Spear (49 types)  Weapon-Staff (59 types)  Weapon-Sword (63 types)  Weapon-Torch (48 types)  Weapon-Trident (44 types)  Weapon-Warhorn (49 types)  Upgrade-Jewel (10 types)  Upgrade-Rune (52 types)  Upgrade-Sigil (37 types)  PvP Salvage Materials (67 types)  Notes [ edit ]  Any Soulbound items that are deposited become Soulbound on Acquire. Therefore, items can be shared between all characters on an account.
Donnie Wahlberg is showing some love for Waffle House … again.  The 47-year-old Blue Bloods star and New Kids on the Block singer made a stop at the popular chain restaurant in Charlotte, North Carolina late on Wednesday night — where he rewarded the staff with a $2,000 tip as well as front row tickets and backstage passes to his band's Total Package Tour.  "My mom waited tables, and my dad tended bars– for years!" Wahlberg wrote on Instagram, captioning a photo of his $82.60 check and the Waffle House staff. "So, when I walk into a #WaffleHouse, and the staff treats me like a king, you better believe I treat them like queens! Thanks to the team at @wafflehouseofficial Charlotte, NC!"   This isn't the first time Wahlberg has shown his generosity for Waffle House employees. In late June, Wahlberg stopped in for a meal at the restaurant in Edgewood, Maryland and left the overnight staff a $500 tip — tweeting a photo with Waffle House staffers Tyler Spangler and Angi Silen, whom he called a "great crew" and thanked for their "awesome service."  On Wednesday night, Wahlberg — who has been documenting his Waffle House meals around the country on social — also took to Facebook live, where he interacted with the staff and patrons while waiting for his order of steak, eggs, grits and bacon to arrive.  "This Waffle House is happening," he said, panning around the busy restaurant — his first stop in North Carolina after flying in from New York City, where he was filming Blue Bloods. "We need to come to Charlotte more often. This Waffle House is love. Everyone's in a good mood in this Waffle House. Southern hospitality!"  RELATED: Celebrities Who Have Left Big Tips at Restaurants  "We're just going to have to invite this whole Waffle House to the concert tomorrow," he said, first passing verbal invitations to his waitress, named Chocolate. "You going in the front row too!"  Great crew at @WaffleHouse in Edgewater MD! Thanks for the awesome service! Night made! #WaffleHouse! pic.twitter.com/7OLoF2U0xr — Donnie Wahlberg (@DonnieWahlberg) June 26, 2017   Another night … Another @wafflehouse! Thanks to Darby, Cole and crew, at Youngstown, Ohio #WaffleHouse! pic.twitter.com/ID750zQfua — Donnie Wahlberg (@DonnieWahlberg) July 1, 2017   Another night – another waffle! Thanks to Bre, Kira & Marquan at Toledo, Ohio @WaffleHouse!  You guys are awesome! Thank you! pic.twitter.com/AQE5P2WtzA — Donnie Wahlberg (@DonnieWahlberg) June 30, 2017   Wahlberg then asked another server named Trina if she's working tomorrow. "You gotta be sick. We're going to give you tickets. Everyone's going."  Earlier in the cast, Wahlberg gave tickets to a fan named Jasmine too.  "She was so nice — we're giving you backstage passes and tickets tomorrow for your mom too," Wahlberg said. "She's bringing her mom. She's coming tomorrow, she's going to meet Boyz II Men and all the New Kids."  He knows a thing or two about restaurants too, co-owning the Wahlburgers burger chain with his brothers Mark and Paul. Though he admitted on Wednesday's Facebook Live, "If I'm not at Whalbergs, guess where I am? Waffle House."  The Total Package Tour, which launched in May and includes Boyz II Men and Paula Abdul, is wrapping up its final four shows this weekend — with stops in Charlotte; Duluth, Georgia; Tampa, Florida; and Hollywood, Florida.
Image Comics December 2017 cover Credit: Image Comics  Image Comics' Spawn: A Holiday Krampus Tale one-shot has been cancelled by the publisher two weeks prior to its planned January 3 release. In addition, the title has been pulled from the publisher's website.  No reason was given for the cancellation, but Diamond Comic Distributors notes that Image might re-solicit the book for eventual release.  Here is the book, which was solicited in Image's December 2017 solicits:  Spawn: A Holiday Krampus Tale #1 (One-Shot)  Story: Todd McFarlane, Ben Timmreck, Jordan Butler  Art / Cover / Variant Cover: Todd McFarlane, Jordan Butler  January 03 / 32 pages / FC / T / $2.99Celebrate the holiday season…SPAWN STYLE with a SPAWN tale that you've NEVER heard before. Visit the old world and witness the entanglements of Spawn and holiday demon Krampus.
These observations — where I look at Real Madrid's history, its players on loan, Castilla, tactical tidbits, and other relevant thoughts -- are now a regular weekly thing. All previous editions can be found here.  There were rightful concerns over Achraf's rushed development, and the overall urgency to get him into the first team this season. There was no real pressure to sell Danilo — an unfulfilled, yet decent rotational piece — and Achraf was on his path of natural progress at Castilla. It was time for him to graduate Solari's school of tactical chaos, but it seemed almost clear that he'd take a stepping stone elsewhere, the same way Marcos Llorente and Jesus Vallejo did before joining the A-squad. Instead, Man City cut Real Madrid a big cheque for Danilo, and Real Madrid said 'OK' — adding the funds to the rising pile of cash they had acquired for other role players — and took a leap of faith with Hakimi.  When Alvaro Odriozola didn't arrive from Real Sociedad this summer, Achraf's spot in the team became more and more real, and when the season started, even the skeptics (*raises hand*) started to accept (forced or otherwise) trust in Zidane's squad-building decisions. Besides, the Frenchman has earned that right.  What's surprised us the most about Achraf this season: how much better he's been defensively than he's been offensively. With Castilla, Achraf would blitz past defenders so fast he'd leave a trail of smoke and fire behind his road-runner legs. He'd regularly out-pace wingers and full-backs to get into space and put in a dangerous cross. We haven't seen that version of Achraf consistently yet. His confidence in beating his man with the ball at his feet is low, still, and his crosses have been off the mark. But, get this kid into open water, and few can thwart his incisive runs into space. We saw it against Sevilla when he scored, and throughout the game he made the day miserable for Franco Vazquez and Lionel Carole.  This sequence, from start to finish, all in the span of 45 seconds, is great:  Achraf is barely on the screen yet at the top of this play, but by the time Modric receives the ball and looks up, the Moroccan has already blurred himself up the field beyond Carole's blindspot. Modric slings the ball up field, and Achraf's low-driven ball is blocked and cleared, at which point Achraf has already out-gunned Nolito from a handicapped position to ensure Real Madrid remains in possession. Fast forward till the end: It's Achraf again who hedges centrally to retain the ball again, assuring Sevilla don't breathe in their own third.  Hakimi has tools — highly encouraging ones. The fact that he's struggled in some areas offensively, but looked good without the ball overall is a good sign — it means he brings things to the table that are conducive to Real Madrid winning even in games where his offense labours. He knows where to be, and when he's caught out, his pace can get him back into the correct spots in record time.  How many times have we seen Achraf this season look like he's about to fall behind, only to laugh at all of us, rev the engine, and turn on cruise control until the deed is done?:  Poor Muriel thinks he's shaken off Achraf three separate times, but he can't. Hakimi is like a mini-Dhalsim.  Pace is a good fall-back, but relying on it as your first play can be troublesome. Couple it with IQ, and you're cooking. Achraf has both. Against Tottenham, and generally in times where we've seen Achraf (and the team collectively), most vulnerable, the Moroccan still shows us good things on the defensive end. Against Sevilla, his defensive awareness was something that stood out. He cut off passing lanes, clamped down on man-to-man defending, and anticipated where the ball would go:  There is a lot that goes into defending the flanks: Understanding when to shift forward and when to pull into reverse, knowing when you have coverage and when you don't, knowing when to double-up on the ball-carrier and when not to, and understanding the delicate art of attacking crosses while monitoring the far-post. You have to be positionally woke while reading the field as oppose to gazing on the ball in a vacuum.  Here you can see Achraf checking over his shoulder to calculate where Nolito is. As he runs to cover, he can track both the crossing lane as well as the man, and is in a great position to snuff out the attack:  Individually, certain players in Real
The new stickers for the battery compartment should arrive tomorrow, all the AC Adaptors should also arrive within this week (scheduled to be in Germany tomorrow), so I'm currently preparing the invoices and eMails for the preorderers.  Click to expand...
Sometime in late 2004, while looking at the blog, Vodkapundit – a great blog, btw – I came across an external link he had to some interesting photos of World War I. What made them of interest was that they were in color! I saved them to my hard drive, and I'm glad I did... the site that had them up ended up removing them.  So I decided to go looking for others on the web. I came across the site, Gallica, bibliothèque numérique de la Bibliothèque nationale de France, There I found all of the images you see here, but, alas, the text was all in French, and the last time I spoke French with any frequency or fluency was 45 years ago! So, initially, I had to use an online translator to get the English text.  Later, Gert in Canada, Didier in Belgium and David in France helped with translating the original French wording which appears below each photo. Any translations errors which remain I must lay sole claim to.  Given the number of images, I have categorized them as follows:  Although color photography was around prior to 1903, the Lumière brothers, Auguste and Louis, patented the process in 1903 and developed the first color film in 1907. The French army was the primary source of color photos during the course of World War One.
Interference with a Tuning Fork If you strike a tuning fork and rotate it next to your ear, you will note that the sound alternates between loud and soft as you rotate through the angles where the interference is constructive and destructive. It is challenging to visualize this in a diagram because of the large difference in scale between the tuning fork and the wavelengths of the sound produced. A tuning fork to produce equal tempered middle-C (C 4 , 261.6Hz) would have a dimension of a few centimeters, but the sound wavelength at room temperature would be about 1.3 m or over four feet. This is an attempt to qualitatively visualize the interference from a binary source using a photo of the interference pattern in a ripple tank with a double vibrator. That photo is superimposed on a sketch of a tuning fork in the hope that it might give some insight about the nature of interference in waves from a double source. But the scale here is profoundly different: the separation of the two ripple tank wave sources is several wavelengths, whereas the separation of the two tines of the C-tuning fork is maybe 1/50th of the wavelength. This pattern would suggest several minima of loudness, whereas the tuning fork gives four minima at 45° from the plane of the two tines when rotated. Animations of the interference patterns with single and multiple sources may be found at Dan Russell's site at Penn State. The pattern at right is from the animation of a lateral quadrupole source. This is the best approximation of the interference of the tuning fork since the two tines of the fork are out of phase, and Russell notes that two opposite phase dipoles make up a lateral quadrupole source. This diagram gets closer to what you experience by rotating the tuning fork by your ear, but the problem of scale is still present since the sound wavelength for the C tuning fork is fifty times the size of the physical vibrator. This diagram shows that Russell's lateral quadrupole gives equal intensities at 90°. But with the tuning fork, your ear tells you that the maxima in the plane of the two tines is significantly stronger than the maxima perpendicular to that plane. Each tine of the fork produces a pressure wave which travels outward at the speed of sound. One part of the wave has a pressure higher than atmospheric pressure, another lower. At some angles the high pressure areas of the two waves coincide and you hear a louder sound. At other angles, the high pressure part of one wave coincides with the low pressure part of the other.
OTTAWA — Conservative leadership candidate Andrew Scheer says universities should lose federal funding if they fail to protect freedom of speech on campus.  A "troubling trend" has surfaced where small groups on campus can shut down events, prevent guest speakers from giving lecture and ban activities or clubs they disagree with, Scheer said in an interview Wednesday. "Campuses are no longer the bastions of free speech that they once were."  Recent examples include a pro-life group having its event cancelled at Wilfrid Laurier University; a student newspaper at McGill refusing to print pro-Israel articles; and protest surrounding University of Toronto professor Jordan Peterson for his views on gender pronouns.  "There are a lot of people who come to campus who say things that are outrageous. And I vehemently disagree with them. That I find offensive. Professors or guest speakers who say terrible things about everything from Christianity to capitalism," Scheer said.  "I just don't go to them. It's as simple as that. And it doesn't bother me. It doesn't keep me up at night. It doesn't make me want to go and tip a car over."  Peterson has struck a public nerve with his refusal to adopt people's preferred gender pronouns and concerns around the effect of Bill C-16, the Liberals' gender discrimination bill, on freedom of speech.  The bill, which is currently making its way through the Senate, would add gender identity and gender orientation to the Canadian Human Rights Act, thus making it illegal to discriminate against someone on those bases.  It would also add these terms to a list, in the Criminal Code, of identifiable social groups that may motivate hate crime or "advocating genocide." (The list already includes sexual orientation, sex and other characteristics — ethnicity, language, disability, etc.)  Cacophonous student protests have surrounded Peterson since he made comments last fall dismissing non-binary gender identities and suggesting using the wrong pronouns could suddenly become a crime. One rally resulted in an activist being charged with assault. Peterson received warnings from the university, too, and publicly wondered whether a proposal for federal grant money had been rejected because of the controversy.  Scheer, who opposes C-16, held up Peterson's right to articulate his point of view as an example of why more incentives are needed to counteract political correctness on campus.  "People can disagree with him. People can refute his points, and stand up for what they believe in. But what bothers me is this sense of shutting out any kind of dissent on certain issues. I believe that Canada is a mature enough country that we can have these debates," Scheer said.  Under Scheer's proposed policy, fostering and protecting free speech would become a criterion on public post-secondary institutions' grant applications to federal agencies such as the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council, the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council, Canadian Institutes of Health Research and Canada Research Chairs.  What bothers me is this sense of shutting out any kind of dissent on certain issues  The goal isn't to create an extra layer of bureaucracy, Scheer promised. "I would instruct the minister to work with these bodies and come up with an easy way to test for it. I imagine in the early days it would be as simple as responding to complaints."  If a university had several incidents and identified a problem on campus, it could show that it was doing something about the problem, he explained, whether pressuring student unions through financial means or putting better security plans in place.  Students, and not institutions, are often the source of controversial actions on campus — but "I do believe the university does have a responsibility to step in and prevent small rabble-rousing groups from having an impact," said Scheer.  Groups can be loud and proud about controversial views on either end of the spectrum, as long as they don't prevent others from exercising their rights, Scheer said. "If universities are allowing small radical groups to infringe on that, I think they have a responsibility to prevent that."  Scheer will face fellow frontrunners including Kevin O'Leary, Maxime Bernier and Kellie Leitch at a final leadership debate in Toronto next week. A new Conservative Party leader will be chosen May 27.  Email: mdsmith@postmedia.com | Twitter: mariedanielles
The Call  God has been working on me for a long-time to share my story; in fact, He has been leading me for most of 2013. In December, I decided to make the leap of conviction and do what I feel called to do.  My personal resolution is to add at least one post per week during 2014. Moreover, I want my posts to provide an appropriate level of detail, in raw form, about my story. There is both pain and magnificence. There is dishonesty and truth. There is shame and praise. Infidelity is wrong. People get hurt. Living without God can be ugly.  This is my inaugural post and I debated for a long-time on the topic. Should I start with one or more events? Various emotions? The affairs? A memory or two? The children? Family? Her? Me? Others involved? Humorous moments? This list goes on. However, I concluded that there is no single, best topic. I just need to write and let God lead.  That said this post is short and simple. Yet, I hope it contains a powerful message that captures many attributes of what happens when infidelity punctures a marriage. This is an audio recording of me attempting to understand what was happening at the time. In this recording, I am trying to speak with one of the men having an affair with my now ex-wife. He is married and has a child. If you listen closely, I did not hang up the phone completely, and you can hear my sighs at the end. He was warned by my ex-wife prior to my call. He never spoke with me. Their names are masked and the voice altered to protect them.  It may seem obvious, but adultery affects others and breaks up families. I believe that people committing infidelity may overlook that fact, and they may believe they will never get caught. They selfishly think of themselves. If you have ever had to confront the other man or other woman, you may be able to relate to this difficult act. If you are in an affair or pondering an affair, would you want your spouse to make a similar call?  Last and most importantly, God is a loving and forgiving God. He loves even the most vile and will forgive the most egregious sins. God offers forgiveness and a new beginning to all the accept Christ.
As mentioned last week, my primary aim is to get the system into a relatively bug-free state prior to adding new functionality. The graph above shows that I fixed quite a few this week, but I have also discovered quite a few too.  Although no closer to starting the column movement code, it is still a good position to be in as I now have a system that has 13 fewer issues in it. Alas, not all coding can be glorious and exciting new functionality!  Most of the work that took place this week occurred in the Armies module – the module that models all aspects of units and armies.  The first 'issue' was this one…  Issues orders to cavalry units…  Runs a 30 second turn and ends up with:  The units didn't exactly move very far…  These kind of bugs can be quite hard to find as the system keeps track of a multitude of variables for each unit. These variables can be hard to follow because the system runs multi-threaded.  Luckily, one of the pieces of work that I also did this week was to update the formation classification system to bring it up to date with the current modelling.  The classification system puts a symbol on a unit to tell the user whether it is Open Order (OO), Order (O), Close Order (CO) or Dense (D). The idea being that a player can instantly see how tightly packed a formation is – something that would be impossible to tell just by looking at the unit.  This subsystem was very old and didn't reflect what was really happening. However, this was rectified, resulting in units being properly classified.  That said, I should probably point out that the game does not use this classification – it knows a unit's precise measurements – the classification is solely a player aid only.  In my case, the classification helped track the issue above…  When I zoomed in onto one of the cavalry units I saw that its density classification is 'D' or dense. That would explain why the units were having problems moving!  These units were created very quickly using default unit sizes, formations, frontages and densities. However, it would appear that these defaults don't give you units that function well…  This defined my next task:  'Update the defaults to generate units that function correctly when created!'  The result:  Note the defaults have made the cavalry units a lot larger. Ok, lets run a turn and see how they perform…  Bingo! All sorted….  Well almost….  The problem with the new defaults is that they highlight just how large the unit size variations can be. Alas, the Army Editor's display window just couldn't cope with some of these new sizes:  Damn! I'm missing a fair bit of the unit. Creating a Chariot unit results in the whole screen being filled by part of that unit! Not good at all.  Conversely, small units like a Roman Maniple became very small and difficult to see.  To fix this, I altered the code in that pane to automatically zoom the camera to properly show off the chosen unit. This code was not trivial as one has to work out apparent sizes in metres based on the camera distance.  Nevertheless it got fixed:  Perfectly zoomed!  Even small units are now zoomed correctly:  The eagle eyed amongst you will have noticed that the window also gets a new scale in the bottom left so that users can more easily determine the size of a unit.  Fixes to tooling might seem a waste of time, but these tools are used to create the game assets – they will also be distributed with the game to allow players to create their own maps, units, armies and scenarios too….  Going back to the loaded scenario, I noticed another potential issue:  I thought 'Oh No – the new classification system is broken already.'  Based on general wargamer bias and expectation, the Macedonian unit seemed to have an incorrect classification. Such a unit would at least be close order, if not dense!  However, after doing my research, I have discovered that this is in fact correct!  This is the default phalanx formation at 16 deep. The Macedonians didn't even give it a name, because it was the 'standard' formation. However, some texts do refer to this formation as the Open formation!!! Woot! My system seems to have classified correctly!  If the above unit closes down to the 8 deep Pyknosis formation, as used prior to contact, the result is:  CO!!! Perfect. Closing the formation down further to the 4 deep Synaspismos results in the system correctly classifying it as 'D' or dense.  Of course, when I did my first formation change, I noticed a bug where the visible model's density classification was
Usage Text  USE_TYPE__T_414 アイドルマスター シンデレラガールズ スターライトステージ! (listen)  USE_TYPE__T_21 <Voice ID 108:2:1 has no transcript, but you can still submit a translation for it.> (listen)  USE_TYPE__T_22 <Voice ID 108:2:2 has no transcript, but you can still submit a translation for it.> (listen)  USE_TYPE__T_23 <Voice ID 108:2:3 has no transcript, but you can still submit a translation for it.> (listen)  USE_TYPE__T_24 <Voice ID 108:2:4 has no transcript, but you can still submit a translation for it.> (listen)  USE_TYPE__T_25 <Voice ID 108:2:5 has no transcript, but you can still submit a translation for it.> (listen)  USE_TYPE__T_26 <Voice ID 108:2:6 has no transcript, but you can still submit a translation for it.> (listen)  USE_TYPE__T_27 <Voice ID 108:2:7 has no transcript, but you can still submit a translation for it.> (listen)  USE_TYPE__T_28 <Voice ID 108:2:8 has no transcript, but you can still submit a translation for it.> (listen)  USE_TYPE__T_41 <Voice ID 108:4:1 has no transcript, but you can still submit a translation for it.> (listen)  USE_TYPE__T_41 <Voice ID 108:4:2 has no transcript, but you can still submit a translation for it.> (listen)  USE_TYPE__T_43 <Voice ID 108:4:3 has no transcript, but you can still submit a translation for it.> (listen)  USE_TYPE__T_44 <Voice ID 108:4:4 has no transcript, but you can still submit a translation for it.> (listen)  USE_TYPE__T_45 <Voice ID 108:4:5 has no transcript, but you can still submit a translation for it.> (listen)  USE_TYPE__T_46 <Voice ID 108:4:6 has no transcript, but you can still submit a translation for it.> (listen)  USE_TYPE__T_46 <Voice ID 108:4:7 has no transcript, but you can still submit a translation for it.> (listen)  USE_TYPE__T_46 <Voice ID 108:4:8 has no transcript, but you can still submit a translation for it.> (listen)  USE_TYPE__T_49 <Voice ID 108:4:9 has no transcript, but you can still submit a translation for it.> (listen)  USE_TYPE__T_49 <Voice ID 108:4:10 has no transcript, but you can still submit a translation for it.> (listen)  USE_TYPE__T_49 <Voice ID 108:4:11 has no transcript, but you can still submit a translation for it.> (listen)
The drug being credited with potentially saving the lives of two American missionaries infected with the deadly Ebola virus was produced in Owensboro.  The serum wasn't manufactured but grown — in a greenhouse full of genetically modified tobacco plants.  Kentucky BioProcessing, acquired by Reynolds American in January, conducts contract research and development for San Diego-based Mapp Biopharmaceutical, said David Howard, spokesman for RAI Ser vices, a subsidiary of Reynolds American.  "In the last week, Kentucky BioProcessing complied with a request from Emory University and Samaritan's Purse to provide a very limited amount (of the compound) to Emory, and KPB has done that," Howard said.  Be the first to know. No one covers what is happening in our community better than we do. And with a digital subscription, you'll never miss a local story. SIGN ME UP!  CNN and NBC News reported Monday that ZMapp had been given to Dr. Kent Brantly and Nancy Writebol, who have been described as showing significant improvement.  The experimental drug apparently had never been tested on humans.  In 2007, Mapp, working under contract for the U.S. Department of Defense and other federal agencies, engaged KBP to develop a process to manufacture a compound designed to be a post-exposure treatment for Ebola virus.  That compound was MB-003 or ZMapp, a cocktail of antibodies that has proven to be the most effective treatment so far in fighting off the Ebola virus.  In a study published last year, scientists at the U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases reported that 43 percent of infected nonhuman primates recovered after receiving the treatment intravenously 104 to 120 hours after infection — after symptoms developed.  "Mapp Biopharmaceutical has the structure of this protein to battle the Ebola. And KPB is building that protein," Howard said.  In Owensboro, tobacco plants are "infected" with the protein, he said, and then they reproduce it "like a photocopier."  The desired proteins are extracted from the plants and purified into a serum.  Scientists have long known that tobacco readily picks up genes inserted into it. The Owensboro facility uses that ability to quickly and inexpensively produce large volumes of a compound within weeks.  KBP also has been selected for work on some of the biggest health threats on the planet, including H1N1 vaccine production, an anti-rabies antibody, norovirus or the "cruise ship virus," HIV prevention, parvovirus, and HPV vaccine.  ZMapp, the drug used on the American Ebola victims, has not been approved in the United States or other countries, Howard said, but the Owensboro facility had begun ramping up production for anticipated drug approval testing protocols this year.  That process might be accelerated now.  "KBP is working closely with Mapp and other agencies to increase production, but that process will take several months," Howard said.
American students performed poorly on an exam of 15-year-olds around the world. Oskari Kettunen The Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) released the results of its 2015 global rankings on student performance in mathematics, reading, and science, on the Program for International Student Assessment, or PISA.  Once again, the United States did poorly compared to other countries and territories, outranked by 38 countries in math, 24 in science, and 22 in reading.  The results are especially stark when looking at US student achievement compared to much poorer countries, Andreas Schleicher, director of education and skills at the OECD, noted on CNN Monday.  "Today the 10% of the most disadvantaged children in Vietnam — and they grow up in very poor households — those children do better than the average American child," Schleicher said.  Vietnam outperformed the US in both math and science. The average income of a citizen in Vietnam is $5,070 yearly, compared with $53,470 for the US.  It's a point that President-elect Trump repeatedly hammered on during his campaign.  "We are rated 28 in the world. The United States, think of it, 28 in the world," he said in a video he uploaded to Facebook earlier this year. "Third-world countries are ahead of us."  Still, Schleicher explained that it's not about the amount of money available for educational spending, but the types of resources the investment benefits.  "It's a lot to do with how to invest those resources," he said." "Whenever these [poorer] countries have to make a choice between, you know, a better teacher and a smaller class, they invest in the capacity, they invest in teaching."
Aniplex of America, Inc. announced on their "Aniplex Live Show," their acquisition of the mecha series Gen Urobuchi (Madoka Magica, Fate/Zero) and Directed by Ei Aoki (Fate/Zero) ALDNOAH.ZERO and Persona4 the Golden ANIMATION for this summer's streaming line-up. These two series will be joining Aniplex's other summer titles including Sword Art Online II, and The irregular at magic high school, continuing from last season, starting this July. These series will be simulcast online on Aniplex Channel, Hulu, Crunchyroll and DAISUKI.   Details of streaming schedules for each title will be announced at a later date. Aniplex has also launched the official U.S. homepages of these two new titles at www.Aldnoahzerousa.com and www.P4GAUSA.com respectively.  ------  Scott Green is editor and reporter for anime and manga at geek entertainment site Ain't It Cool News. Follow him on Twitter at @aicnanime.
Some of the biggest names in the technology industry are among the guests at the 61st annual meeting of the Bilderberg Group – a secretive talking shop for the top echelons of business and politics or a shadowy cabal seeking to rule the world, depending on whom you believe.  Eric Schmidt, making his fourth trip, will represent Google as the group meets at the Grove Hotel in Watford, UK. Another old conference hand, Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos, will also be there. Craig Mundie, formerly Microsoft CTO and now Ballmer's special advisor, is on the guest list, as is PayPal-founder and Facebook-backer Peter Thiel and online activist Lawrence Lessig.  Technology issues are on the agenda, according to the organization's press release. Among the 12 topics for discussion over the three days of the conference: "How big data is changing almost everything", "Cyber warfare and the proliferation of asymmetric threats", and "Online education: promise and impacts".  Also on the 140-person guest list is the head of the International Monetary Fund Christine Lagarde, president of European Commission José Barroso, government bigwigs from across Europe and the US (including long-time attendee Henry Kissinger), the heads of financial, manufacturing, and media companies in the US and Europe, and a light smattering of journalists, all of whom have been sworn to secrecy.  Secret rulers of the world?  The Bilderberg Group takes its name from the hotel used for the first meeting back in 1954. The group was set up by European and US statesman as a confidential conference for the great and the good to discuss world issues candidly and openly.  The conference is hosted in a different venue each year in a quiet five-star hotel with good security and attached golfing facilities. Attendees are encouraged to speak their minds and are forbidden to discuss conversations in the conference with outsiders. This year's conference even has a no-fly zone set up over the hotel's grounds.  For years the group met behind closed doors and its existence wasn't mentioned in the mainstream media. But with the increase in information from internet communications, the news of the get-togethers got out and conspiracy groups got interested, not least because of the august attendee roll.  Former British professional footballer and now conspiracy-theory loon David Icke claims that Bilderbergers have created genetically-engineered blood lines of people to run the world as the captains of industry and use 3D projections to manipulate human perception and emotions. He also claims many are 12-foot, blood-drinking, shape-shifting lizards.  It has also been reported (correctly) that presidents Clinton, Bush the Second, and Obama all attended conferences before they were elected, as were British prime ministers Margaret Thatcher and Tony Blair.  This is taken by some as proof that the group picked them for their roles, but Bilderberg founder and British cabinet minister Dennis Healey said that invitations are simply issued to people who show potential.  In an interview with journalist Jon Ronson for the documentary "Secret Rulers of the World", Healey said that the group was set up to allow people at the top of their respective fields to discuss world issues, and while attendance does give the advantage of networking, it's not a sinister cabal set on world domination.  "To say we were striving for a one-world government is exaggerated, but not wholly unfair," he said. "Those of us in Bilderberg felt we couldn't go on forever fighting one another for nothing and killing people and rendering millions homeless. So we felt that a single community throughout the world would be a good thing." ®
The high profile deaths of three Calgarians connected to Islamic extremists may mean recruiters will look for fighters in other cities.  That's according to Michael Zekulin, a political science instructor at the University of Calgary whose research focuses on terrorism and radicalism.  Multiple reports state Farah Mohamed Shirdon, a man in his early 20s from a Calgary, was killed in Iraq while serving with Jihadist forces.  His alleged death comes after two other former Calgarians died fighting with extremists in the last year: Damian Clairmont was killed while fighting in Syria and Salman Ashrafi died in a suicide bombing mission in Iraq.  "There is probably something that has been bubbling below the surface for awhile, but in a year it could be somewhere else," said Zekulin of why Calgary seems to be a hotbed for people joining extremist movements.  While Calgary has seemingly become a "cluster" for people willing to join these movements, Zelukin said it only takes one person in any location to become interested and spread the ideas to those around them.  "There's nothing special about Calgary," he said.  "Once you have that one or two, they are able to reach back into the community — they know lots and lots of people and they know exactly what to say.  "It's a movement that feeds itself."  There's greater credibility when the information and encouragement is coming from someone you know rather than being "sold" by strangers over the Internet, he added.  Social media has made the recruiting of new members to extremist groups much wider-spread and more sophisticated operations, said Zekulin.  Though Calgary has drawn a lot of attention for having been home to three people killed while fighting with these groups, Zelukin believes the target will move to a different area, if it hasn't already begun growing elsewhere.  "With all the revelations that have emerged over the last year … with all the attention (recruiters) want to move off the radar," he said.  "That just means, unfortunately, that another city is probably going to inherit this problem."  jenna.mcmurray@sunmedia.ca  On Twitter: @SunJMac
Don't let the Mickey Mouse shirt fool you. As far as the MPAA is concerned, the public needs a reminder of who Richard O'Dwyer really is.  "Being 24, posing for newspaper photo shoots in a cartoon sweatshirt, and having your mother and Jimmy Wales speak for you, does not mean you are incapable for [sic] breaking the law."  The reminder above comes from a supposedly leaked MPAA memo obtained by TorrentFreak. It outlines talking points when discussing the much publicized O'Dwyer case, involving the 24-year-old and the "link site" he used to run. TVShack.net didn't directly host possibly infringing materials, but the site did link to such videos. While this would likely be legal under UK law, O'Dwyer landed squarely in the crosshairs of US copyright enforcers. This spring, news broke that O'Dwyer would be extradited to the US for this alleged copyright infringement despite no locally illegal activities being performed in his UK home. O'Dwyer is currently appealing this decision, but the July timeline for an appeal decision was delayed without concrete rescheduling.  O'Dwyer's fight sparked Internet activism of the strongest kind, with Wikipedia founder Jimmy Wales pushing an online petition. Wales referenced the SOPA-PIPA derailment as the public's "first big victory" in the realm of Internet freedom, and sees preventing O'Dwyer's extradition as a potential second. To date, more than a quarter of a million people have signed the petition. But the MPAA takes a clearly different view (while reassuring all that they are pro-Internet freedom).  "This case isn't about Internet freedom. It's about a man profiting from theft. However, we do welcome a larger discussion about how best to protect intellectual property online while ensuring an Internet that works for everyone."  In addition to some initial talking points, the memo contains a faux-Q&A to keep commentary along the party lines. These responses run the gamut from thoughts on the Wales petition ("We think it's presumptuous of Mr. Wales to claim to speak for the 'general public'") to the extradition itself ("Governments and law enforcement agencies make these decisions and we are not in a position to comment on the specifics of the extradition proceedings").  We will update this post if any additional information from the MPAA becomes available, and we'll continue to follow the O'Dwyer situation.
42 U.S.C.  United States Code, 2009 Edition  Title 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE  CHAPTER 146 - ELECTION ADMINISTRATION IMPROVEMENT  CHAPTER 146-ELECTION ADMINISTRATION IMPROVEMENT  SUBCHAPTER I-PAYMENTS TO STATES FOR ELECTION ADMINISTRATION IMPROVEMENTS AND REPLACEMENT OF PUNCH CARD AND LEVER VOTING MACHINES  Sec.  15301. Payments to States for activities to improve administration of elections.  15302. Replacement of punch card or lever voting machines.  15303. Guaranteed minimum payment amount.  15304. Authorization of appropriations.  15305. Administration of programs.  15306. Effective date.  SUBCHAPTER II-COMMISSION  Part A-Establishment and General Organization  I74subpart 1-election assistance commission  15321. Establishment.  15322. Duties.  15323. Membership and appointment.  15324. Staff.  15325. Powers.  15326. Dissemination of information.  15327. Annual report.  15328. Requiring majority approval for actions.  15329. Limitation on rulemaking authority.  15330. Authorization of appropriations.  Subpart 2-election assistance commission standards board and board of advisors  15341. Establishment.  15342. Duties.  15343. Membership of Standards Board.  15344. Membership of Board of Advisors.  15345. Powers of Boards; no compensation for service.  15346. Status of Boards and members for purposes of claims against Board.  Subpart 3-technical guidelines development committee  15361. Technical Guidelines Development Committee.  15362. Process for adoption.  Part B-Testing, Certification, Decertification, and Recertification of Voting System Hardware and Software  15371. Certification and testing of voting systems.  Part C-Studies and Other Activities To Promote Effective Administration of Federal Elections  15381. Periodic studies of election administration issues.  15382. Study, report, and recommendations on best practices for facilitating military and overseas voting.  15383. Report on human factor research.  15384. Study and report on voters who register by mail and use of Social Security information.  15385. Study and report on electronic voting and the electoral process.  15386. Study and report on free absentee ballot postage.  15387. Consultation with Standards Board and Board of Advisors.  Part D-Election Assistance  I74subpart 1-requirements payments  15401. Requirements payments.  15402. Allocation of funds.  15403. Condition for receipt of funds.  15404. State plan.  15405. Process for development and filing of plan; publication by Commission.  15406. Requirement for public notice and comment.  15407. Authorization of appropriations.  15408. Reports.  Subpart 2-payments to states and units of local government to assure access for individuals with disabilities  15421. Payments to States and units of local government to assure access for individuals with disabilities.  15422. Amount of payment.  15423. Requirements for eligibility.  15424. Authorization of appropriations.  15425. Reports.  Subpart 3-grants for research on voting technology improvements  15441. Grants for research on voting technology improvements.  15442. Report.  15443. Authorization of appropriations.  Subpart 4-pilot program for testing of equipment and technology  15451. Pilot program.  15452. Report.  15453. Authorization of appropriations.  Subpart 5-protection and advocacy systems  15461. Payments for protection and advocacy systems.  15462. Authorization of appropriations.  Subpart 6-national student and parent mock election  15471. National Student and Parent Mock Election.  15472. Authorization of appropriations.  SUBCHAPTER III-UNIFORM AND NONDISCRIMINATORY ELECTION TECHNOLOGY AND ADMINISTRATION REQUIREMENTS  Part A-Requirements  15481. Voting systems standards.  15482. Provisional voting and voting information requirements.  15483. Computerized statewide voter registration list requirements and requirements for voters who register by mail.  15484. Minimum requirements.  15485. Methods of implementation left to discretion of State.  Part B-Voluntary Guidance  15501. Adoption of voluntary guidance by Commission.
Rights Note  This item has been made available for use in research, teaching, and private study. Researchers are responsible for using these materials in accordance with Title 17 of the United States Code and any other applicable statutes. If you are the creator or copyright holder of this item and would like it removed, please contact us at als_digitalcollections@ecu.edu.
This weekend's episode of Diplo and Friends will include live sets from Notting Hill Carnival, which took place on Monday, August 27th, 2012. The carnival's line up included Major Lazer, Sean Paul, David Rodigan MBE, Mele, Lil Salva, Hudson Mohawke, Nicky da B and Raf Riley!  Listen to live sets from Major Lazer, Lunice and Trinidadian Soca Hero, Machel Montano, on Diplo and Friends!
Welcome to my web site. My Dogs NSW Membership number is 2000648390 Australian Champion Daesdaemar Dream Girl (Hayley) winning Best Of Breed Sydney Royal 2014 Cheree Tester with Mannerking Midnight Memories winning Best Of Breed at Sydney Royal 2015. Hayley competing with the other Daesdaemar Dogs for the Best Breeders Team at Sydney Royal 2014 Hayley, Hollie and Emily at Sydney Royal 2014. The sign at Mannerking HQ Many Thanks to Perry Adams And Angus Webster for making it. Aust Champion Mannerking Read All About It (Jake) Winning Best Of Breed At Canberra Royal 2015 Hayley (Australian Champion Daesdaemar Dream Girl) winning Best Junior In Group Canberra Royal 2012 Mannerking Breaking Dawn (Bella) at Sydney Royal 2012 Bella on the move at Sydney Royal 2012 Mannerking New York (Emily) At Spring Fair 2013 On the following pages you will find details of my Japanese Spitz. Feel free to have a look around and contact me if you would like to know more! Mannerking Angelo wins the Dogs NSW Puppy Competition for June 2011 with this picture entered by his owner Lauren Mills. Congratulations Lauren and Angelo. I hope you enjoy your visit. also...this recently commissioned Limited Edition Japanese Spitz print is now available...please see www.pencilspixelsandpaint.com "EVIE" By Bevan "MEIKA" By Bevan Mannerking - Home of happy and healthy Japanese Spitz. We can also give "doggie holidays" to our home bred Spitz when their owners are away. Have a look at Poppy enjoying her stay !! Watch this video. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FfM518LUXS0 Goulburn, NSW, Australia.   237376 Visitors
16 reviews:  4.5 ) $13 .59 This item ships free (worldwide) This item(worldwide) working... stock Temporarily sold out format model Micro V2(1.5ml), 304 SS + PEEK, Silver + Blue Micro V2(1.5ml), 304 SS + PEEK, Silver + Blue(Kit) Micro V2(1.5ml), 316 SS + PEEK, Silver + Blue Micro V2(1.5ml), 316 SS + PEEK, Silver+Blue(SJMY) Micro(1.5ml), 316 SS + PMMA, Silver + Blue Micro(1.5ml), 316 SS + PMMA, Silver + Blue -B Micro(1.5ml), 316 SS, Silver Micro(4.5ml), 316 SS + PMMA, Silver + Blue Micro(4.5ml), 316 SS + PMMA, Silver + Yellow Nano, 22mm, SS, Black Nano, 22mm, SS, Black - B Nano, 22mm, SS, Blue Nano, 22mm, SS, Blue - B Nano, 22mm, SS, Silver Nano, 22mm, SS, Silver - B Nano, 22mm, SS, White Nano, 22mm, SS, White - B quantity get an alert when it's back change display currency Note: FastTech prices are charged in USD. These other currencies are displayed for your reference only. Age confirmation: By adding this item to your shopping cart, you confirm that you have reached the age of majority in your country of residence. Wishlist Report Errors Price Match Report Errors FastTech strives to display the most accurate information on product pages. If you know or suspect something is wrong, please let us know so it can be fixed. Please describe what is wrong: Required. Cancel Price Match Competitor's price or packaged deal: Required. Competitor's product page URL: Required. Other comments: Cancel Subscribe to Product Be the first to know when the product's price or stock status change. Your e-mail address: Required. Cancel Thank you We have received the information you submitted. Close Bulk Pricing  3 ~ 4 ~ 4 5 + $12.81 $12.53 looking for more?
The belief that the death / destruction of something can be attributed to you masturbating to that item.This can be applied to masturbation that results in the termination of that Object by accident, or masturbation with the intent to kill ( malicious masturbation)  Example of a Fapsassination:I once fapped to the idea of having sex with one of my moms really hot friends before going to sleep Woke up the next morning to find out she'd killed herself that night...that was something that nobody I know will ever find out about.-Reddit user TyperSniper
FCC Proposal Would Limit What Internet Providers Can Do With Users' Data  Enlarge this image toggle caption Pablo Martinez Monsivais/AP Pablo Martinez Monsivais/AP  The FCC has unveiled a proposal that would restrict Internet providers' ability to share the information they collect about what their customers do online with advertisers and other third parties.  If adopted, these would be the first privacy rules for Internet service providers, resulting largely from last year's net neutrality regulations that expanded the Federal Communications Commission's oversight authority over the industry. (Those rules are currently pending in court.)  Thursday's unveiling of the proposal from Chairman Tom Wheeler is just a first step: The FCC is expected to vote to formally propose this plan on March 31, soliciting public comments on a variety of questions about how the rules should work before the final version gets drafted.  The key elements of Wheeler's proposal include a requirement that broadband providers such as Comcast, Verizon or T-Mobile clearly disclose what data they collect on you — for instance, it could be browsing history, use of apps or location — and how they shared that collected data with other companies for marketing or other purposes.  In some instances, subscribers would be asked to opt in or they'd be given a choice to opt out, depending on how the information is used. (Re/code has a helpful breakdown of the details.) The proposal also has provisions for better security of the information traveling through ISPs' networks.  Wheeler wrote in a Huffington Post op-ed that ISPs should be held to the same privacy standard as telephone companies:  "Your ISP handles all of your network traffic. That means it has a broad view of all of your unencrypted online activity — when you are online, the websites you visit, and the apps you use. If you have a mobile device, your provider can track your physical location throughout the day in real time. Even when data is encrypted, your broadband provider can piece together significant amounts of information about you — including private information such as a chronic medical condition or financial problems — based on your online activity. "The information collected by the phone company about your telephone usage has long been protected information. Regulations of the (FCC) limit your phone company's ability to repurpose and resell what it learns about your phone activity. "The same should be true for information collected by your ISP."  Telecom companies are resisting the FCC's push to regulate their privacy practices, arguing that this puts them on unequal footing compared with websites and web services such as Google that also collect a lot of information about people's digital tracks. As The New York Times points out, those companies are overseen by another agency:  "The regulations, if approved, would put broadband providers under stronger privacy oversight than Internet companies like Google and Facebook. Those companies are monitored by the Federal Trade Commission, whose ability to create specific privacy rules is limited. "Many privacy advocates have pushed for a greater role by other agencies because the F.T.C. cannot create rules for online privacy and can only monitor data collection practices as an enforcement agency."  AT&T's Bob Quinn, senior vice president of federal regulatory affairs, said in a blog post this week that Internet providers "do not currently live in a 'regulatory-free zone' when it comes to privacy," but one guided by the FTC's regime, which prohibits deceptive and unfair trade practices:
We eat a ton of kale salad but this one is the absolute best! I highly recommend this one, you WILL NOT be disappointed. I've added the Smoky Maple Tempeh Crumbles to make it more of a meal-type salad and it's awesome! You can make this without the tempeh too, it's so good either way! Plus, this salad keeps well in the fridge for a few days so it makes awesome leftovers!!  The original recipe is from food blog Melomeals: VEGAN FOR $3.33 A DAY, one of my favorites!  Here is her recipe:  Ingredients:  4 cups kale, destemmed and cut in a chiffonade – I use Black Kale/Lacinato or also called Elephant Kale  1/2 – 1 teaspoon best quality sea salt (smoked salt would be fabulous here!) – I use Alderwood Smoked Salt from World Spice Merchants but you can use regular salt if that's all you have (Smoked salt is best though!!)  2 Tablespoons freshly squeezed orange juice  1 Tablespoon balsamic vinegar – I add a little extra  ½ teaspoon garlic powder  ½ teaspoon orange zest  2 cups shredded carrots  1 cup chopped red cabbage  ½ cup chopped sun-dried tomatoes  2 Tablespoons minced red onion  ½ cup chopped green olives – make sure you mince them well  1 cup toasted sunflower seeds  ½ teaspoon cumin seeds  Pinch nutmeg  ½ cup raisins  1 cup cilantro, chopped  1 Tablespoon soy sauce  Salt/pepper to taste if needed  Directions:  – In a large mixing bowl, add the kale, salt, orange juice, vinegar and garlic powder. Massage well with  your hands for several minutes.  – Add the rest of the ingredients and massage well  Let salad sit for 10 minutes; taste and adjust seasonings and enjoy!  For the Smoky Maple Tempeh Crumbles – you can use these in a lot of other dishes too, they are great in breakfast burritos, other salads and just by themselves! You can also keep them in cubes instead of mashing them.  * 2-4 blocks Organic Tempeh – from Trader Joe's  * 2-4 tsp Liquid Smoke (depending on how smoky you like it!)  * 2-4 Tbsp Pure Maple Syrup (depending on how sweet you like it!)  – I use 4 blocks of tempeh (from Trader Joe's) so I have enough for leftovers (I always double this salad recipe for leftovers) – you can use 2 for a single batch of this salad  ** Note: I used to cook these in oil but I've since removed oil from our diet. You can bake these crumbles on parchment paper at 350 degrees for about 20-30 minutes. Stir every 10 minutes or so.  – Slice tempeh into cubes  – Boil tempeh in salted water for about 15 minutes  – Drain tempeh and transfer to mixing bowl  – Mash tempeh into crumbles  – Heat Safflower oil until hot and add crumbled tempeh  – Brown tempeh crumbles a bit then add Maple Syrup and Liquid Smoke – taste and add more if you like.  Top salad with crumbles once they've cooled… YUMMY!!!  Share this: Twitter  Facebook  Tumblr  Pinterest  Google  Print  Email   Tags: amazing kale salad
Romania's public television TVR and the European Broadcasting Union (EBU) have reached an agreement that makes it possible for TVR to broadcast the Eurovision international music contest and the next two football world championships, in 2018 and 2022, TVR announced on Thursday.  TVR has had a tensioned relationship with EBU in recent years, due some EUR 10 million worth of debt TVR has to pay EBU. This has determined EBU to exclude the Romanian television from the 2016 Eurovision, and the public television also lost the right to broadcast the World Cup in Brazil this year.  TVR has negotiated with EBU to repay the debt over the next three years. Moreover, EBU will offer consultancy to TVR, free of charge. An EBU team of consultants will come to Bucharest next week.  [email protected]
Peter Galbert uses a curved card scraper as a shaping tool to fair curves and dial in complex shapes on chair seats  The rabbet joint is a useful joint to know. Here, hand-tool expert Vic Tesolin shows three ways to cut one by hand—with a rabbet plane, with a shoulder plane, and with a chisel and router plane.
Real Talk on Reality  Leaking is high risk  On June 5th The Intercept released an article based on an anonymously leaked Top Secret NSA document. The article was about one aspect of the Russian cyber campaign against the 2016 US election — the targeting of election device manufacturers. The relevance of this aspect of the Russian operation is not exactly clear, but we'll address that in a separate post because… just hours after The Intercept's article went live the US Department of Justice released an affidavit (and search warrant) covering the arrest of Reality Winner — the alleged leaker. Let's look at that!  The medium is the message  The timing of the DoJ release was clearly premeditated to send a message to would be leakers that the long arm of the law moves fast. The implied narrative is that mere hours after the leaked document was released they had already collared the leaker. Additionally, the search warrant is worded to throw as much blame on The Intercept as possible. The truth is that Ms Winner was doomed, regardless of what The Intercept did to protect their source – which was, basically, nothing.  Timeline of events  A timeline reveals that the reality is more complicated than the emerging narratives ("DoJ caught Ms Winner in hours"[0], "The Intercept grassed up their source"[1], "it is impossible to leak safely."[2])  May 5th : NSA disseminates the document  : NSA disseminates the document May 9th : Ms Winner searches for keywords that surface the document which she prints, smuggles out of the secure work facility and, "approximately a few days later," mailed to The Intercept. This was the only document she printed the entire month.  : Ms Winner searches for keywords that surface the document which she prints, smuggles out of the secure work facility and, "approximately a few days later," mailed to The Intercept. This was the only document she printed the entire month. May 24th : A reporter from The Intercept contacts a defence contractor via "text message" (probably Signal, because end to end encryption). The reporter asks the contractor to verify documents which were mailed from "Augusta, Georgia" and sends images of the docs. The reporter suggests that the documents come from Ms Winner's workplace. The contractor says the docs are fake.  : A reporter from The Intercept contacts a defence contractor via "text message" (probably Signal, because end to end encryption). The reporter asks the contractor to verify documents which were mailed from "Augusta, Georgia" and sends images of the docs. The reporter suggests that the documents come from Ms Winner's workplace. The contractor says the docs are fake. May 27–29 : Ms Winner travels to Belize.  : Ms Winner travels to Belize. May 30 : The Intercept contacts NSA for verification. They provide NSA with a copy of the document. NSA negotiates to redact certain parts to limit the exposure of sources and methods.  : The Intercept contacts NSA for verification. They provide NSA with a copy of the document. NSA negotiates to redact certain parts to limit the exposure of sources and methods. June 1st : The Intercept reporter contacts the contractor to inform them that the documents are authentic.  : The Intercept reporter contacts the contractor to inform them that the documents are authentic. June 1st : The contractor reports the media contact from The Intercept, the images of the report and the report identification number.  : The contractor reports the media contact from The Intercept, the images of the report and the report identification number. June 1st : NSA audits access logs to determine who read the document. They also, based on the copy provided by The Intercept, filter that search for people that printed the document. This gives them 6 suspects.  : NSA audits access logs to determine who read the document. They also, based on the copy provided by The Intercept, filter that search for people that printed the document. This gives them 6 suspects. June 1st : NSA examines the workstations of all 6 suspects and determine that Ms Winner had previously had a link to The Intercept — email contact. (This was on March 30th in relation to The Intercept's podcast.)  : NSA examines the workstations of all 6 suspects and determine that Ms Winner had previously had a link to The Intercept — email contact. (This was on March 30th in relation to The Intercept's podcast.) June 2nd : The FBI conducts surveillance on Ms Winner to verify her vehicle, her residence, and her mobile phone.  : The FBI conducts surveillance on Ms Winner to verify her vehicle, her residence, and her mobile phone. June 3rd : FBI interviews Ms Winner who admits to accessing and printing the document (which was in the logs), and not having a "need to know," i.e. she did not access the document as part of her job requirements. During the interview they also get her to confess to removing the printout and mailing the printout to The Intercept.
"[T]he vast majority of people who use marijuana never progress to using other illicit drugs, or even to becoming regular marijuana consumers... The principal connection between marijuana and other illicit drugs mostly involves the nature of the market, not the nature of the high. In the Netherlands, where the marijuana market has been quasi-legal and regulated for decades, marijuana use is less prevalent than in the United States, and those who do consume marijuana are less likely to use other illicit drugs... Perhaps most important, new evidence now indicates that the proliferation of medical marijuana laws and dispensaries around the United States is strongly associated with fewer people dying from overdoses involving heroin and pharmaceutical opioids. The most likely reason is that people are finding marijuana more helpful than opioids in managing different types of pain."   Ethan Nadelmann, JD, PhD  Executive Director of Drug Policy Alliance  "Fears of Marijuana's Gateway Effect Vastly Exceed the Evidence," nytimes.com  Apr. 26, 2016 Executive Director of Drug Policy Alliance"Fears of Marijuana's Gateway Effect Vastly Exceed the Evidence," nytimes.comApr. 26, 2016  "[T]he vast majority of people who use marijuana never progress to using other illicit drugs, or even to becoming regular marijuana consumers... The principal connection between marijuana and other illicit drugs mostly involves the nature of the market, not the nature of the high. In the Netherlands, where the marijuana market has been quasi-legal and regulated for decades, marijuana use is less prevalent than in the United States, and those who do consume marijuana are less likely to use other illicit drugs... Perhaps most important, new evidence now indicates that the proliferation of medical marijuana laws and dispensaries around the United States is strongly associated with fewer people dying from overdoses involving heroin and pharmaceutical opioids. The most likely reason is that people are finding marijuana more helpful than opioids in managing different types of pain."   "Marijuana use is positively correlated with alcohol use and cigarette use, as well as illegal drugs like cocaine and methamphetamine. This does not mean that everyone who uses marijuana will transition to using heroin or other drugs, but it does mean that people who use marijuana consume more, not less, legal and illegal drugs than do people who do not use marijuana.   People who are addicted to marijuana are three times more likely to be addicted to heroin.   The legalization of marijuana increases availability of the drug and acceptability of its use. This is bad for public health and safety not only because marijuana use increases the risk of heroin use."   Robert L. DuPont, MD  President of the Institute for Behavior and Health  "Marijuana Has Proven to Be a Gateway Drug," nytimes.com  Apr. 26, 2016 President of the Institute for Behavior and Health"Marijuana Has Proven to Be a Gateway Drug," nytimes.comApr. 26, 2016  "Marijuana use is positively correlated with alcohol use and cigarette use, as well as illegal drugs like cocaine and methamphetamine. This does not mean that everyone who uses marijuana will transition to using heroin or other drugs, but it does mean that people who use marijuana consume more, not less, legal and illegal drugs than do people who do not use marijuana.People who are addicted to marijuana are three times more likely to be addicted to heroin.The legalization of marijuana increases availability of the drug and acceptability of its use. This is bad for public health and safety not only because marijuana use increases the risk of heroin use."
Download raw source  Delivered-To: john.podesta@gmail.com Received: by 10.142.49.14 with SMTP id w14cs227786wfw; Tue, 28 Oct 2008 20:29:55 -0700 (PDT) Received: by 10.210.87.19 with SMTP id k19mr348132ebb.109.1225250993797; Tue, 28 Oct 2008 20:29:53 -0700 (PDT) Return-Path: <cbutts.obama08@gmail.com> Received: from ug-out-1314.google.com (ug-out-1314.google.com [66.249.92.175]) by mx.google.com with ESMTP id 23si3500352eya.7.2008.10.28.20.29.51; Tue, 28 Oct 2008 20:29:52 -0700 (PDT) Received-SPF: pass (google.com: domain of cbutts.obama08@gmail.com designates 66.249.92.175 as permitted sender) client-ip=66.249.92.175; Authentication-Results: mx.google.com; spf=pass (google.com: domain of cbutts.obama08@gmail.com designates 66.249.92.175 as permitted sender) smtp.mail=cbutts.obama08@gmail.com; dkim=pass (test mode) header.i=@gmail.com Received: by ug-out-1314.google.com with SMTP id 17so502699ugm.14 for <john.podesta@gmail.com>; Tue, 28 Oct 2008 20:29:51 -0700 (PDT) DKIM-Signature: v=1; a=rsa-sha256; c=relaxed/relaxed; d=gmail.com; s=gamma; h=domainkey-signature:received:received:message-id:from:to :in-reply-to:content-type:x-mailer:mime-version:subject:date :references; bh=Sy6boX2+0m6wgEvvwd1QCSOZR5gj9r2PWXRxLpQivPE=; b=WLoS/Cuox0+MgPJJ8eWsWZnserChl2qdz1jOAnPeJB8iBmopo4q/HDtX7GvVhmDe+j 3gLoNs45c6puZ6poEZkVKZmN5x8Nb2P6n0mjYJbsNXd6ICz6O3do7ZlojOM6D3SGpGXj t7IX/y+1A9P3g+Egyl8WVVrOeekf0LZc9VHMc= DomainKey-Signature: a=rsa-sha1; c=nofws; d=gmail.com; s=gamma; h=message-id:from:to:in-reply-to:content-type:x-mailer:mime-version :subject:date:references; b=KhCDu4OSCDqTRLc/x/1DO+agZYU4rbBEIgCq+oyUzoc23QFik4p2tZpMfGdOmI0yhO rzYSDBhqcsvcXPQoT5BV410s6lYdKGXV1CnCLyfRwe1YicIvRTvj3CUuz+kpyGN8ooZy E5k+HhZEuuC22BELq6eJYogrGGWOLJDJ2Hoto= Received: by 10.103.178.17 with SMTP id f17mr3848620mup.8.1225250991739; Tue, 28 Oct 2008 20:29:51 -0700 (PDT) Return-Path: <cbutts.obama08@gmail.com> Received: from ?10.86.69.157? ([32.165.17.130]) by mx.google.com with ESMTPS id w5sm9630706mue.10.2008.10.28.20.29.46 (version=TLSv1/SSLv3 cipher=RC4-MD5); Tue, 28 Oct 2008 20:29:50 -0700 (PDT) Message-
An Open Letter on Nuclear Energy to President-Elect Donald Trump and Governor Rick Perry  Dear President-Elect Donald Trump and Governor Perry,  We are writing as scientists, economists, conservationists and citizens to urge you to take strong action to save and grow America's nuclear energy sector.  Nuclear power plants in the U.S. are struggling against cheap natural gas, heavily-subsidized renewables and low electricity demand. At the same time, global demand for electricity is set to rise 70 percent in 25 years thanks to the rise of energy-hungry developing nations around the world.  And technological advances mean that new nuclear reactor components can increasingly be mass-manufactured in factories and shipped around the world for assembly on-site.  Meeting rising global demand for electricity with advanced nuclear reactors instead of coal will do more to reduce air pollution and mitigate climate change than any number of United Nations treaties.  In the 1960s and 70s, the US was the world leader in nuclear technologies. Today, unfortunately, we are forcing innovative and well-capitalized entrepreneurs like Bill Gates to go abroad to build new projects.  China is making a big investment in at least five different advanced nuclear designs, and last September signed a deal to develop and manufacture a new nuclear reactor designed by Gates' company, Terrapower. Company officials say they wanted to develop the reactor in the U.S., but outmoded federal licensing regulations made doing so impossible.  Those regulations create unnecessary delays. After 16 years and $500 million in Department of Energy and private sector investment, the U.S. firm NuScale — whose smaller plant design includes novel safety features — must wait another three and half years for approval from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to build its first commercial plant.  Meanwhile, Canada is supporting the development of a first-of-kind reactor that uses chemical salts rather than water as a coolant. The design precludes meltdowns and could be cheaper than current models.  We can't afford to leave global competition to chance. A better approach would be modeled on President Dwight Eisenhower's 1953 "Atoms for Peace" initiative. Recognizing that cheap electricity is a key driver of economic growth and job creation, Eisenhower's program financed the peaceful use of nuclear power around the world "to provide abundant electrical energy in the power-starved areas of the world."  This starts with the U.S. significantly expanding the financing of US-made nuclear reactors through the Export-Import Bank, World Bank and other development agencies.  Because the U.S. government does not offer financing, "U.S. companies continue to lose significant market share to an ever‐increasing number of foreign government‐owned or led competitors, including Russia, Japan, France, China and the Republic of Korea," warned the Department of Commerce recently.  What's needed are not subsidies but rather long-term loans and loan guarantees to foreign customers seeking to buy American technologies.  Ensuring that US firms have a competitive edge in global nuclear energy markets would do more to protect the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty than any amount of diplomatic maneuverings at the United Nations.  Back home, we must level the playing field for nuclear. Solar and wind receive large federal and state subsidies that nuclear plants don't get. Until there is a single, technology-neutral incentive for clean energy, subsidies to every form of clean energy should be made equal.  We encourage you to authorize the Departments of Defense and Energy to buy and use advanced nuclear reactors for use at military bases and laboratories to demonstrate their safety, and bring down their price.  DOE should create a "test bed," perhaps with ocean access for easier export, where private sector entrepreneurs can quickly demonstrate their new designs, and rapidly bring them to global markets at low cost.  The DoD already does this with the nuclear reactors it uses in submarines and aircraft carriers. Indeed, the Navy originally developed the pressurized light-water reactor technology now used in most nuclear plants.  All of this will require new regulations to take account of the inherent safety features of new designs. It makes no sense to regulate jet planes the same way we do propeller planes and yet that is precisely how the federal government treats new nuclear reactor types—an approach that needlessly slows their development.  We know you and the new Congress will seek to deliver on industrial jobs for working class voters, and work together on a new infrastructure program. Making nuclear great again should be a key part of those efforts.  Signed*,  Mark Muro, Senior Fellow and Policy Director, Metropolitan Policy Program at Brookings Institution, co-author, "Post-Partisan Power"  Steve Hayward, Distinguished Visiting Scholar, Institute of Governmental Studies, UC Berkeley, co-author, "Post-Partisan Power"  Michael Shellenberger, President, Environmental Progress, co-author, "Post-Partisan Power"  Mark Perry
FREEDOM OF RELIGION OR BELIEF  Freedom to adopt, change or renounce a religion or belief  [25 years mandate practice] UDHR  "Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion; this right includes freedom to change his religion or belief [...]."  ICCPR  Art. 18 (1): "Everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion. This right shall include freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of his choice [...]."  1981 Declaration of the General Assembly  Art. 1 (1): "Everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion. This right shall include freedom to have a religion or whatever belief of his choice [...]."  Human Rights Committee general comment 22  Para . 3: "Article 18 does not permit any limitations whatsoever on the freedom of thought and conscience or the freedom to have or adopt a religion or belief of one's choice; ".  Para . 5: "The Committee observes that the freedom to 'have or to adopt' a religion or belief necessarily entails the freedom to choose a religion or belief, including the right to replace one's current religion or belief with another or to adopt atheistic views, as well as the right to retain one's religion or belief."  Freedom from coercion  [25 years mandate practice] UDHR  "Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion; this right includes freedom [...] either alone or in community with others and in public or private, to manifest his religion or belief in teaching, practice, worship and  observance."  ICCPR  Art. 18 (2): "No one shall be subject to coercion which would impair his freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of his choice."  1981 Declaration of the General Assembly  Art. 1 (2): "No one shall be subject to coercion which would impair his freedom to have a religion or belief of his choice."  Human Rights Committee general comment 22  Para . 5: "Article 18.2 bars coercion that would impair the right to have or adopt a religion or belief, including the use of threat of physical force or penal sanctions to compel believers or non-believers to adhere to their religious beliefs and congregations, to recant their religion or belief or to convert. Policies or practices having the same intention or effect, such as, for example, those restricting access to education, medical care, employment or the rights guaranteed by article 25 and other provisions of the Covenant, are similarly inconsistent with article 18.2. The same protection is enjoyed by holders of all beliefs of a non-religious nature."  The right to manifest one's religion or belief  [25 years mandate practice] ICCPR  Art. 18 (1): "Everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion. This right shall include freedom [...] either individually or in community with others and in public or private, to manifest his religion or belief in worship, observance, practice and teaching."  Art. 18 (3): "Freedom to manifest one's religion or beliefs may be subject only to such limitations as are prescribed by law and are necessary to protect public safety, order, health, or morals or the fundamental rights and freedoms of others."  1981 Declaration of the General Assembly  Art. 1 (1): "Everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion. This right shall include freedom to have a religion or whatever belief of his choice, and freedom, either individually or in community with others and in public or private, to manifest his religion or belief in worship, observance, practice and teaching."  Art. 1 (3): "Freedom to manifest one's religion or belief may be subject only to such limitations as are prescribed by law and are necessary to protect public safety, order, health or morals or the fundamental rights and freedoms of others."  Human Rights Committee general comment 22  Para . 4: "The freedom to manifest religion or belief in worship, observance, practice and teaching encompasses a broad range of acts. The concept of worship extends to ritual and ceremonial acts giving direct expression to belief, as well as various practices integral to such acts, including the building of places of worship, the use of ritual formulae, and objects, the display of symbols, and the observance of holidays and days of rest. The observance and practice of religion or belief may include not only ceremonial acts but also such customs as the observance of dietary regulations, the wearing of distinctive clothing or head coverings, participation in rituals associated with certain stages of life, and the use of a particular language, customarily spoken by a group. In addition, the practice and teaching of religion or belief includes acts integral to the conduct by religious groups of their basic affairs, such as freedom to choose their religious leaders, priests and teachers
CLOSE The Navy gave a first look inside the stealthy and futuristic Zumwalt destroyer on Friday during the ship's first port stop at a Rhode Island naval station. (Sept. 9) AP  In this 2013 image provided by the U.S. Navy, the USS Zumwalt is floated out of dry dock. (Photo: AP)  WASHINGTON — It may be time to consign the $800,000-per-shell cost of the new destroyer USS Zumwalt's long-range ammunition to that dubious list of Pentagon-procured $640 toilet seats, $37 screws and $436 hammers.  The Navy has reportedly balked at the price and isn't planning to buy more. Navy spokeswoman Capt. Thurraya S. Kent, without addressing the price issue, would say only that "to address evolving threats and mission requirements, the Navy is evaluating industry projectile solutions (including conventional and hypervelocity projectiles) that can also meet the DDG 1000 deployment schedule and could potentially be used as an alternative to LRLAP."  DDG 1000 is the Navy designation of the Zumwalt. LRLAP refers to the Long Range Land-Attack Projectile.  In a follow-up email, Kent clarified that she had not said the Navy has abandoned the LRLAP.  Defense News, quoting an unnamed Navy official, broke the story that the long-range shells for the newest U.S. Navy destroyer, named after Vietnam-era Chief of Naval Operations Elmo R. Zumwalt, are too expensive at $800,000 each, and no more will be purchased.  That makes the stealthy ship, still more than a year from deployment as a weapons system, unable to do some of its primary missions: softening up beachheads for Marine landings and taking out inland terror-training camps.  Records show the Navy budgeted for 150 of the 7-feet-long, 225-pound shells for $476,946 each in 2015. The price rose as the number of Zumwalt-class destroyers the Navy plans to build fell from 32 to three. The first, the USS Zumwalt, was commissioned in Baltimore last month and is currently en route to its San Diego home port.  Dan Grazier, the Jack Shanahan Fellow at the Project on Government Oversight, the nonprofit watchdog group that discovered the toilet seat and hammer costs in the 1980s, said he was skeptical that a Navy that routinely shoots million-dollar Tomahawk cruise missiles was deterred by the cost.  The former Marine captain, who trained making amphibious landings aided by artillery, said the Navy wants to use the advanced electro-magnetic pulse-powered rail guns on the new class of destroyers.  "I don't think the Navy's really interested in a gun cotton-powered weapon anymore," he said. "That's so 20th century."  Lockheed Martin, the projectile manufacturer, released a statement addressing the Zumwalt ammunition situation: "As the DDG 1000's mission continues to evolve, and taking into consideration funding profiles available to support the weaponization of the ship in light of the severe reduction in the planned production quantities, the U.S. Navy decided to evaluate alternate solutions to LRLAP. Lockheed Martin is working aggressively to provide the Navy with options in relation to the DDG-1000's long-range land attack mission."  The 610-foot Zumwalt was designed to lie off the coast and lob the shells with GPS precision at targets as much as 80 miles away at up to 10 per minute.  Because of its angular design features, the ship's radar signature makes it look to adversaries like a small fishing boat.  Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2g3xI5O
I hadn't been out long, 20 minutes or maybe half an hour but it was dark by the time I got home. I plonked the few bits I had gone to the shop for on the side in the kitchen and listened. It seemed rather quiet, too quiet really and when I went round to the front room the sofa was empty. When I had gone out they had been sitting together on the sofa. That is where I had left them and it hadn't entered my head they wouldn't still be there when I got home.  I sat down on the sofa and pulled off my boots and socks letting my feet rest on the soft red rug that covered the centre of the room. That is when I heard it, or should I say heard her, it was a cross between a groan and yelp and was accompanied by the unmistakable sound of a hand striking flesh. I lay back on the sofa and looked up at the ceiling as if maybe I might be able to see through it. The spanking sound came again and again, like a short round of applause filling the silence of the house. I smiled at the sound and my body's instant response to it, dampness between my thighs.  I didn't bother gathering up my discarded boots or socks but left them exactly where I had dropped them. In the kitchen I shoved the few perishables from my shopping trip in the fridge and left the rest sitting in the bags on the side, then flicking off the lights I made way to the bottom of the staircase.  I waited at the bottom of the stairs for a moment, listening. Had they heard me in the kitchen and stopped? Then she made a noise again, a low throaty moan and I knew if they had heard me they were ignoring my return home and carrying on. I tiptoed up the staircase and across the landing. The door to our bedroom was closed. I bent down to look through the keyhole but the angle was wrong and all I could see was my wardrobe and some of my clothes scattered on the floor where I had left them earlier in the day.  The sound of her voice made me jump  "Daddy please" she whimpered  Argghhh please what? I thought, please touch me, please fuck me, please spank me more or less or…. my imagination flitted through all these possibilities, jumping from one to another like a little series of pornographic gifs playing in my brain. Every single one of them turned me on and as I pressed my ear tighter against the door one of my hands disappeared down pass the waist band of my leggings and my fingertips sort out the hard nub of my clitoris within the puffy folds of my cunt.  She moaned again, but this time it was not accompanied by the sound of spanking, instead I could hear the rustling of sheets and the slight creak of our bed frame shifting under their weight. Our bed, I thought, they are fucking in our bed and I am out here in the dark on the landing listening to them. I should be outraged, insulted, sad, but I was none of those things. Instead I was excited, thrilled even, and my body was responding to the touch of my fingers and the sound of them together and the thoughts in my brain.  I pressed me forehead against the door, pushing against it slightly as my fingers rubbed frantically inside my leggings and my ears strained to hear them. The door can't have been properly latched because all of a sudden there was a soft click noise and I felt it give way. I watched as it gently swung open just enough for a shaft of light to come slicing through the gap between the door and the frame sending a beam of light across the landing.  I waited to see if they had noticed. Had the noise of the door been enough to alert them to my presence? For a brief moment I thought it had as there was a definite silence on the other side of the door but then it was broken with another groan, but it wasn't her this time, it was him.  "Oh yes Kitten" followed the groan.  Instantly my fingers sprang back into action and I closed my eyes and let all the dirty possible things they might be doing together play through my mind but then I realised, the light, the gap, maybe I could see now and so I inched my way over to where the door met the wall and pressed my eye up against the gap.  He was fucking her, she was pinned down on the bed beneath him, his hand holding her wrists above her head, and her legs spread wide and her head thrown back as he pushed himself into the soft flesh of her cunt again and again. In our bed, without me.  I could feel my orgasm building inside me but how could I ask, he didn't even know I was here and asking would break the moment, it would reveal me to them as
The board of Bus Éireann has said it is "gravely concerned" about losses the company is experiencing while strike action is being carried out by its staff.  An indefinite strike action, which began due to a dispute over management's decision to implement a survival plan for the State-owned company without union agreement, is under way.  Bus Éireann has said the losses are accelerating, and estimated that the dispute is costing it €500,000 per day.  Around 110,000 Bus Éireann customers are affected by the strike.  The board of Bus Éireann met to consider management proposals for a survival plan including up to 300 redundancies.  Following the meeting, the company said in a statement that it was unable to sign off on the 2016 company accounts, or pass this year's budget without agreement from its staff.  It said its inability to sign off the accounts is a "very serious matter", and it "must now formally advise CIE that this governance requirement will not be met".  Management presented the board with a plan to secure the company's future - the key component is elimination of "grossly inefficient work practices".  It has requested all staff to urgently engage with management at the company through their representatives to agree a survival plan to prevent insolvency.  The company said without a plan encompassing necessary work practice changes to generate savings, it cannot fund a voluntary redundancy scheme.  The company also said without a plan generating savings to fund voluntary redundancies, the board has no option but to consider other measures to avoid insolvency.  Bus Éireann's Chief Commercial Officer has said the company is perfectly salvageable.  Speaking on RTÉ's Drivetime, Stephen Kent said measures can be taken to avoid immediate insolvency.  He said based on delivering a survival plan that would ensure the long-term viability of the company, there would be 300 voluntary redundancies.  Mr Kent said, however, that the redundancies would have to be targeted.  He said management is prepared to go to any forum for talks with unions, but discussions would have to be time-limited.  Asked about the potential spread of the industrial dispute to Iarnród Éireann or Dublin Bus, Mr Kent said: "There is absolutely no reason for that to happen. There is no dispute with each of those two companies."  He said there is an issue with the Minister for Transport getting involved in the dispute, saying it is a problem that can be solved between management and staff representatives.  "This is all a perfectly salvageable business. What we need to is engage with the employees and to get people to accept what we believe are very reasonable changes to some custom and practice."  "And we require some flexibility in the driver rosters, and some of the other aspects of the business, in order to make the business more flexible and more responsive. And it will generate the savings", he added.  Disruption may spread to other transport companies  Earlier, Bus Éireann unions stressed that they were not in dispute with other CIE group companies but said they could not rule out workers at Dublin Bus and Iarnród Éireann joining the protest.  This afternoon, SIPTU confirmed that its members in Dublin Bus and Iarnród Éireann are to ballot for industrial action in light of the ongoing Bus Éireann dispute.  SIPTU representatives from the three companies met at Liberty Hall in Dublin to discuss the ongoing strike.  The meeting heard of a planned protest in support of Bus Éireann workers to be held at Leinster House on Wednesday to coincide with a meeting of the Oireachtas Transport Committee, which Minister for Transport Shane Ross is expected to attend.  SIPTU sector organiser Willie Noone said: "The representatives agreed that the protest should be supported as it is a means of highlighting the failure of the minister to take responsibility for the dysfunctional state of the public transport service.  "We are encouraging members of the public and of the union, including those who work in the public transport sector and are available, to attend the protest.  "The meeting also gave a mandate for a ballot for industrial action of union members in Dublin Bus and Irish Rail in sympathy with and in support of their colleagues in Bus Éireann.  "They believe that they are next in the firing line if management in Bus Éireann is allowed to force through cuts to wages and changes to conditions of employment of their staff."  Mr Ross's department issued a statement today noting his "extreme concern" over the ongoing situation.  "The minister remains extremely concerned about the impact of the Bus Éireann strike on the travelling public," the statement said.  "The strike is also harmful to the company's already difficult financial position. Realistic negotiations are required, the type that will lead
Copy selected text into clipboard. Take quick notes for later use. And a whole lot more...  (EDIT 05 mar 2012: New version 0.6.96 is out!!! A bunch of new features have been added lately (print, notifications, shortcuts, GDocs export folder, ...). If you have problems try to go to the options page and click on "Defaults" and then "Save". Please report any issues mailing to my Google+ profile's address or to clickboard.test [at] gmail.com. Cheers ;) What is ClickBoard? It's a one-click web clipper! Copy selected text into clipboard. Take quick notes for later use. And a whole lot more... Watch the video (2nd snapshot on the left) for an overiew of all the features (still have to update this to show the new features as well)! • Copy selected text or page title, url, image links, alt text, html values... • Create and manage notes with a simple interface. • Organize notes in tabs so that your "Movie Notes" don't get mixed up with your "Wiki Notes" or "To Do" things. • Sync and export notes to Google Docs™ in various formats. • Ability to star and choose a speficic folder when exporting a document to GDocs. • Option to automatically expand current selection to include whole words. • Automatically save the page url along with the note. • Enable/disable the extension in textboxes and https pages. • Ability to create a note when hitting CTRL+C (you can disable this feature from the settings page). • Copy all or only selected notes to clipboard. • Paste notes in text boxes via context menu or keyboard shortcuts (CTRL+SHIFT+1-9). • Search notes (CTRL+F). • Print notes (CTRL+P). • Quickly enable/disable extension with CTRL+SHIFT+E shortcut. • Autosave note's textarea content and caret position. • Switch theme and layout of the extension for a better experience. Check the settings to see other options (wrench icon in the popup)! It works in GMail™ too!!! (remember to check the "https" setting first) Never get stuck again in loops like Select text -> Right Click -> Copy -> Switch to Notepad -> Right Click -> Paste -> Switch back to Chrome ->... Boost your productivity online with this extension and feel free to comment, request features, or report bugs (contact me at clickboard.test [at] gmail.com). • Intercept copy event Automatically create a note when you copy text via context menu or by hitting CTRL+C (you can disable this functionality unticking "note on copy" in the settings). • Google Docs™ features. As of version 0.5.9 you can save all your notes on Google Documents and restore them with just one click whenever you want from wherever you are. Now you can also export your notes to Google Documents as html, spreadsheet or plain text. From 0.6.96 you can choose the destination folder and have the option to star the exported document. Remember to give the authorization first (don't worry, the extension doesn't have access to your password or private data). • Context Menu & Search/Filter features. As of version 0.6.0 a 'ClickBoard' entry will appear in the context menu when you right-click on a page. From it you have access to other copy options to quickly send title and url of page, links and images to the clipboard. You can also copy text from any html element you click on. And you can paste your notes into text boxes or any other html editable element right from the context menu too. A new search/filter feature has been added. Just click on the magnifying glass icon and enter the text you want to search for. If a note doesn't contains that text it will be greyed out (NB: the search is case-insensitive and is performed also on the url and date fields). Give it a try... It's free!!! -- Once enabled, it will work only on new tabs (and by the way NOT in the Extension Gallery), so please refresh your tabs or open new ones in order for the extension to operate properly -- Please rate it. ChangeLog: ver 0.6.98 · autosave note's textarea content · export to specific folder (as Manfred P. requested ;) · option to star exported document · chrome-like in-popup shortcuts (CTRL+P, CTRL+F, CTRL+T, CTRL+F4, CTRL+N, ...) · changes/fixes (jQuery 1.5, new autoResize, ...) ver 0.6.90 · print notes feature · paste notes via keyboard shortcuts (CTRL+SHIFT+1-9) · enable/disable extension shortcut (CTRL+SHIFT+E) · desktop notifications · redesigned settings panel · improved
Item # BO-3  Keychain Bottle Opener  A compact opener featuring our world famous blue handle and a 10mm wrench. Fits perfectly on a keychain or in a pocket or wedge pack. A take along tool you shouldn't be without.  MSRP  $5.95 Add to Cart This item ships free*  Need service? See our Limited Warranty or get Replacement Parts in a snap.
As Toronto grows ever more sophisticated, and its downtown more affluent, it's inevitable that established residential neighbourhoods will change. But even as revitalized interiors become more and more the norm, the idea of going the full Monty – tearing down an outdated 1920s city home and starting over – can be traumatic for the rest of the street, especially if your dream house is Modernist. This handsome new house in the Roncesvalles area by Altius Architects is a splendid example of how it can be done with sensitivity, but even so, it initially faced considerable opposition.  There's a received wisdom that streetscapes should be consistent, and since whole swaths of the city were built during a feverish period between about 1910 and 1930, many of our downtown streets are lined with houses that are remarkably similar. But since then, pretty much everything else about life in the city has changed radically. It's becoming rare now to find a house that hasn't undergone at least some renovation over its life, from simply upgrading the windows and furnace, to total gut-and-rebuilds that retain nothing of the original but the façade.  "Through the '80s and '90s, the vast majority of our work was adding a kitchen and family room onto the back of the house," recalls Altius principal architect Graham Smith. "It's a reaction to the formal layout of so many traditional homes, with the living room and dining room at the front and the kitchen on the back. But then everyone inevitably ends up in the kitchen, so why do you even need a living room? And the idea of the breakfast nook, with another table 15 feet away in the dining room, is even more absurd."  A house that's only 20 or 30 feet wide can't afford to waste that much space, so the next big wave was to go open-concept. But there are other problems with shoehorning this layout into an old city house: not everyone wants to live with the sound of the TV in the front of the house while they read at the back, for example. Add in upgrading all the mechanicals, adding insulation, and reinforcing a structure that may not have been all that well built in the first place, and the whole process can become prohibitively expensive – before you even start adding wish-list items like a nicer kitchen. All for a house that, apart from nostalgia, has little real historical or architectural value.  As property values continue to skyrocket in the city, homebuyers are realizing that starting over not only makes sense aesthetically, it's financially sensible as well. "It used to be that people thought of apartments or condos as a place to start, then when you could afford it, you moved up to a starter home, then a bigger one," Smith says. "But now, they're thinking of their homes as a long-term investment; a new house significantly raises the value of that investment."  So the question becomes, what kind of a house to build? Most people in our conservative city still opt for familiar traditional styles, with a wide variation in both taste and quality. But both homebuyers and, hopefully, their neighbours, are beginning to accept that there's room for something altogether new.  One of the greatest drivers for contemporary architecture is not merely aesthetic, but practical: its ability to accommodate state-of-the art environmental efficiencies, an issue that can only become more pressing as time wears on. But, especially for a younger generation that may have grown up in a contemporary condo and lives in a city that's increasingly populated by good modern commercial architecture, contemporary design's appeal lies with the freedom it affords. It allows them to design a home that suits the way we live now, rather than adhere to some romantic ideal from a century ago.  In this case, the kitchen is the literal and figurative centre of the house, and the rest of the main floor relates without being completely engulfed by it. The central column that comprises the stairway rises all the way to the top floor, flooding the house with light – a universal need with houses set cheek by jowl with their neighbours. There's a natural progression through the day from the entrance (or the garage set under the house, with its mudroom entry for kids laden with sports gear or snowy boots); to the kitchen or other main-floor seating areas; to the second storey for kids' rooms and den; then finally the top storey for the master suite. Yet the whole house works together; there's no need to concede to conventional divisions.  Still, the most common objection to Modernist replacement houses, and the most difficult to quantify, is an emotional one. People love old houses, and there's a pervasive fear that putting up a slick glass-and-steel box in a row of dignified old Edwardians will be akin to putting up a McDonald's on their street. (And, as with every other form of design, there's just as
Still loading...  A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z AA AB AC 1 Match Schedule 14th of April ( Friday) Map Streamer Referee Match Schedule 15th of April ( Saturday) Map Streamer Referee Match Schedule 16th of April ( Sunday) 2 1 11 3 A 1RPC (NC) vs BAA (TR) Acan South Heretia A RMIS (TR) vs BAA (NC) Streams: twitch.tv/sme_official 4 3 18:00 CEST 0 0 17:00 CEST 3 Forfiet Semi Finals twitch.tv/sme_official2 5 2 12 twitch.tv/sme_official3 6 A WIB/WOHA (TR) vs MEDK/XTAC (NC) Fort Liberty themadkosovan Reltor A MEDK/XTAC (TR) vs 1RPC (NC) Kessels Crossing halospud Z00mer 7 0 18:00 CEST 3 0 17:00 CEST 3 *(c/g) marks the case where faction picks are the same 8 5 15 21 Map Streamer Referee team captains can make an agreement who plays what faction 9 A BAA (NC) vs WIB/WOHA (TR) Fort Liberty Heretia A BAA (NC) vs MEDK/XTAC (TR) Hossin BioChem DutchDuckyyz Codex/Pure 1RPC (NC) vs H (TR) Hossin BioChem Honzikus/Reltor or the winner of coin toss gets to choose either a faction or a side 10 0 20:00 CEST 3 2 19:00 CEST 3 0 17:00 CEST 3 11 6 16 12 A RMIS (TR) vs MEDK/XTAC (NC) Hossin BioChem Reltor A WIB/WOHA (TR) vs 1RPC (NC) Peris Eastern Grove halospud Reltor 13 0 20:00 CEST 3 Forfiet 1 19:30 CEST 3 Finals Due to inability for H and RA to find date and time 14 9 19 24 to play their match, final match is canceled. No team has forfieted 15 A RMIS (TR) vs 1RPC (NC) Kessels Crossing Aphotix/Z00mer A RMIS (c/g) vs WIB/WOHA (c/g) vs They agreed due to RA win in grp that RA gets 16 0 22:00 CEST 3 Forfiet 0 21:00 CEST 3 Forfeit / NO FINALS / bonus points for 1st place awarded and H for 2nd 17 3rd Place 18 3 13 23 Map Streamer Referee 19 B C4T (VS) vs DIGT/252v (TR) Peris Eastern halospud Joharnis B H (TR) vs DIGT/252v (NC) Peris Eastern themadkosovan Heretia 1RPC vs MEDK/XTAC Acan South Honzikus/Z00mer/Heretia 20 3 18:00 CEST 0 3 17:00 CEST 0 3 21:00 CEST 2 21 4 14 22 Map Streamer Referee 22 B RA (NC) vs UFOs/ORBS/RE4 (TR) Lithcrop Fortress PureCrystal21 B UFOS/ORBS/RE4 (TR) vs C4T (NC) Acan South DutchDuckyyz Reltor RA (NC) vs MEDK/XTAC (TR) Nettlemire Gardens Z00mer/Fallout SMs:WO 23 3 18:00 CEST 0 3 17:00 CEST 2 3 17:00 CEST 1 1st RA 24 7 17 *Xtac pulled in the numbers ringer rule adjusted for +1 for XTAC 2nd HA 25 B DIGT (NC) vs RA (TR) Bridgewater Shipping halospud PLSGetBetter B DIGT/252v (NC) vs UFOS/ORBS/RE4 (TR) Lithcorp Fortress Ahorns themadkosovan 3rd 1RPC 26 0 20:00 CEST 3 0 19:30 CEST 3 4th MEDK/XTAC 27 8 18 28 B H (TR) vs UFOs/ORBS/RE4 (NC) Wokkuk Shipping DutchDuckyyz Reltor B RA (TR) vs C4T (NC) Wokkuk Shipping Heretia 29 3 20:00 CEST 0 3 19:30 CEST 0 30 10 20 31 B H (TR) vs C4T (NC) Pale Canyon halospud Honzikus B H (TR) vs RA (NC) Bridgewater Shipping halospud Honzikus 32 3 22:00 CEST 0 1
Grinding basically has no place in interactive systems. In this episode, I talk about why that's my position. I also respond to a bunch of comments from my Psychological Exploitation Games article.  Also if you want to know more about my Interactive Forms.
The Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008  An Act  To prohibit discrimination on the basis of genetic information with respect to health insurance and employment.  Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,  SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.  (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the �Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008�.  (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows:  Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.  Sec. 2. Findings.  TITLE I--GENETIC NONDISCRIMINATION IN HEALTH INSURANCE  Please note: Title I is not included here. The Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services and the Treasury have responsibility for issuing regulations for Title I of GINA, which addresses the use of genetic information in health insurance.  TITLE II--PROHIBITING EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF GENETIC INFORMATION  Sec. 201. Definitions.  Sec. 202. Employer practices.  Sec. 203. Employment agency practices.  Sec. 204. Labor organization practices.  Sec. 205. Training programs.  Sec. 206. Confidentiality of genetic information.  Sec. 207. Remedies and enforcement.  Sec. 208. Disparate impact.  Sec. 209. Construction.  Sec. 210. Medical information that is not genetic information.  Sec. 211. Regulations.  Sec. 212. Authorization of appropriations.  Sec. 213. Effective date.  TITLE III--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  Sec. 301. Severability.  Sec. 302. Child labor protections.  SEC. 2. FINDINGS.  Congress makes the following findings:  (1) Deciphering the sequence of the human genome and other advances in genetics open major new opportunities for medical progress. New knowledge about the genetic basis of illness will allow for earlier detection of illnesses, often before symptoms have begun. Genetic testing can allow individuals to take steps to reduce the likelihood that they will contract a particular disorder. New knowledge about genetics may allow for the development of better therapies that are more effective against disease or have fewer side effects than current treatments. These advances give rise to the potential misuse of genetic information to discriminate in health insurance and employment. (2) The early science of genetics became the basis of State laws that provided for the sterilization of persons having presumed genetic �defects� such as mental retardation, mental disease, epilepsy, blindness, and hearing loss, among other conditions. The first sterilization law was enacted in the State of Indiana in 1907. By 1981, a majority of States adopted sterilization laws to �correct� apparent genetic traits or tendencies. Many of these State laws have since been repealed, and many have been modified to include essential constitutional requirements of due process and equal protection. However, the current explosion in the science of genetics, and the history of sterilization laws by the States based on early genetic science, compels Congressional action in this area. (3) Although genes are facially neutral markers, many genetic conditions and disorders are associated with particular racial and ethnic groups and gender. Because some genetic traits are most prevalent in particular groups, members of a particular group may be stigmatized or discriminated against as a result of that genetic information. This form of discrimination was evident in the 1970s, which saw the advent of programs to screen and identify carriers of sickle cell anemia, a disease which afflicts African-Americans. Once again, State legislatures began to enact discriminatory laws in the area, and in the early 1970s began mandating genetic screening of all African Americans for sickle cell anemia, leading to discrimination and unnecessary fear. To alleviate some of this stigma, Congress in 1972 passed the National Sickle Cell Anemia Control Act, which withholds Federal funding from States unless sickle cell testing is voluntary. (4) Congress has been informed of examples of genetic discrimination in the workplace. These include the use of pre- employment genetic screening at Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, which led to a court decision in favor of the employees in that case Norman-Bloodsaw v. Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory (135 F.3d 1260, 1269 (9th Cir. 1998)). Congress clearly has a compelling public interest in relieving the fear of discrimination and in prohibiting its actual practice in employment and health insurance. (5) Federal law addressing genetic discrimination in health insurance and employment is incomplete in both the scope and depth of its protections. Moreover, while many States have enacted some type of genetic non-discrimination law, these laws vary widely with respect to their approach, application, and level of protection. Congress has collected substantial evidence
"'Babysitting' scores points for sustaining a shaky premise (and camera), but is ultimately too high on verve and too low on veritable laughs."  Is the synopsis/plot summary missing? Do you want to report a spoiler, error or omission? Please send us a message If you are not a registered user please send us an email to info@filmaffinity.com  All copyrighted material (movie posters, DVD covers, stills, trailers) and trademarks belong to their respective producers and/or distributors.  For US ratings information please visit: www.mpaa.org
It works as advertised. Being able to keep the factory amps and chimes is a plus. All I did was matched the wires up to the radio and worked like a charm. You can also adjust the output so that the radio signal matches the Bose amp. The only issue I have was the unit itself is kinda bulky and had to squeeze everything into a tight place in my Cadillac Deville. If you are like me and wanting to get rid of the factory radio this is your best solution.
If you followed the financial drama of 2008-09, you might remember "the scariest chart ever" — a graphic comparing U.S. jobs losses during the crisis to those in previous downturns. The '08-'09 crisis was by far the worst since the Great Depression.  That "scariest chart" is now history as the U.S. has regained all those job losses. But Capital Economics has published a new one that might just might deserve that same name — if you're a real estate owner in Greater Toronto.  The chart compares Toronto house prices, as measured by the Teranet house price index, to the city's sales-to-new-listings ratio — basically the number of homes sold as a percentage of new homes coming on the market.  The chart shows that house prices follow the ratio up and down very closely — what happens to the ratio happens to prices a few months later. And right now, for Toronto, that ratio has dropped off a cliff:  Now, don't panic just yet. What this chart shows is that house prices are in for a decline on the scale seen during the financial crisis — from which Toronto's market quickly bounced back.  But the risk is that even more homeowners will put their houses on the market, and/or demand for homes will decline even further than it has already (sales dropped by a steep 20.3 per cent in May).  And if that happens, prices will likely fall even further.  "The housing boom is over, with a correction in prices coming."  — David Madani, Capital Economics  David Madani, Capital Economics' senior Canada economist, recently predicted a 40-per-cent price drop for the Toronto area — likely the most pessimistic prediction out there.  "Overall, the incoming data suggest that the housing boom is over, with a correction in prices coming," Madani wrote in a client note Wednesday.  "With banks pulling back, alternative mortgage lenders getting squeezed and tighter regulatory policy curbing demand, housing will likely become a drag on the economy this year."  But that price correction hasn't quite arrived. Although Toronto's average house price dropped in May, that number tends to be volatile from month to month, and the benchmark price of comparable homes continued to rise last month.  The May edition of the Teranet-National Bank house price index, released Wednesday, recorded a 28.7-per-cent increase from the same month a year earlier. Month to month, Toronto recorded its strongest price growth ever, with prices rising 3.6 per cent from April to May.  All the same, the sudden decline in sales and equally sudden spike in new listings has most analysts predicting at least a cooling off — something that might actually be welcome news for homebuyers, as Toronto's affordability levels have hit historic lows.  "That trajectory is exactly what the region needs,' CIBC Capital Markets economist Benjamin Tal wrote earlier this month. "A market that is falling due to the force of its own gravity as opposed to an external shock."  What's Going On In Housing? Our weekly newsletter delivers the news and analysis you need on Canada's housing market. Sign up below and don't miss an issue.  newsAlso on HuffPost
Sequels to indie games Knytt Series and Really Big Sky are headed free to PlayStation Plus subscribers.  Indie publisher Ripstone has announced a trio of releases for Sony's PlayStation Plus Presents label: retro platformer Knytt Underground, hypnotic 'shmup Big Sky Infinity and a third, as-yet-unannounced game.  Both Knytt Underground and Big Sky Infinity will be playable on PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Vita.  All three will be freely downloadable to PlayStation Plus subscribers for eight weeks after launch.  PlayStation Plus Presents is the little brother to Sony's Instant Game Collection promotion. That service provides Plus gamers with a rotating roster of ten highly-rated mainstream games, downloadable for free. Recent highlights have included Dead Space 2 and Deus Ex: Human Revolution.
SEATTLE -- A Seattle food bank, which was located right in the middle of the women's march Saturday, got a surprise from all the people passing by.  Marchers donated nearly $10,000 in cash to the Food Bank at St. Mary's.  The food bank usually serves about 500 people on a typical Saturday, but they had to close early due to the large crowds. Many of their clients could not reach the food bank, and they were only able to hand out goods to about 250 people.  "Before mid-day, it became very clear that we weren't going to be able to serve all the people that we would need to serve," said Alison Alfonzo Pence, executive director of the Food Bank at St. Mary's.  The food bank team handed out bottled water to the crowd and let people use their restrooms. Marchers pulled out their wallets and returned the favor.  "For $10,000 to come in unexpectedly, it was absolutely huge. We were just talking in a board meeting about the shortfall that we were going to experience this year, so it is a big help," said Pence.  Copyright 2016 KING
Powerful features. Simple to use.  Easily track your time and earnings for one or more jobs. Clock in and clock out as you work or enter start and stop times yourself. HoursTracker groups your entries by day, week, or month, so you can easily see how you spend your time week to week or across jobs. Pay periods are automatically calculated, including overtime and net pay estimates.  Never forget to clock in again.  Receive notifications when you arrive or leave, or let HoursTracker use your location to automatically record your time entries. Your jobs list can be ordered nearest-first to save scrolling. Low-power location services minimize battery drain.  Organize using tags.  Tags are a powerful way to organize your jobs and time entries. Simply tag jobs or entries with a keyword, like "Paid." Multiple tags can be applied to an item, and you can reuse tags. Tag a job, and that tag also applies to all of its entries.  Declutter using filters.  Create filters to quickly show or hide jobs and entries based on tags. Filters are always available by pulling down on any list. And, filters can be combined for even more power. Just tap a filter to toggle it On or Off.  Watch the Video   No need to watch the clock.  HoursTracker can alert you when you're done for the day. Set an expected number of hours per day, and you'll get a notification when you reach those hours for that job, taking multiple time entries and the job's time rounding options into account. A notification fifteen minutes prior helps you get to a stopping point by quitting time.  Manage jobs in a few taps.  Editing jobs is quick, easy, and non-destructive. You control whether or not changing the job rate affects prior entries. Changing pay period or overtime settings never alters your time entries.  Add jobs easily. Only a name is required, but many options are available. You can copy an existing job if you need to add several similar jobs. Add more than 15 jobs, and HoursTracker will display an index, like the Contacts app.   Streamlined time entry.  Select a start time, then either an end time or a duration. Shortcut buttons help you make selections faster. Entries can have their own hourly rate. You can easily add a day's entries at once using the Add Break function to account for any number of breaks.  Flexible export options.  Export your time entries to e-mail in text or spreadsheet-ready CSV format. Select specific jobs, or date ranges to narrow your export. Numerous options give you control over how your export is organized and what is included in it. You can send your export to one or multiple e-mail addresses by separating them with semi-colons.  More than a list of jobs.  If you spend your day jumping between jobs, jobs list actions help you quickly get things done without losing your place. You can clock in or add an entry to any job right from the list. Just tap a job to call up the actions menu.  Shortcut gestures save you time and effort.  Shortcut gestures speed up your everyday tasks. Tap on a job with two fingers to instantly clock in or out. Tap and hold a job to edit the most recent time entry for that job. Double-tap pickers to switch between one-minute and five-minute increments.
Japanese title: 貧乳巨乳ヒストリー  H-manga one-shot by Shiden Akira about a girl previously teased as flat-chested by her younger brother eventually grows a knockout pair of breasts.  The shirt she wears is well-known as the MEGA MILK or "Titty Monster" meme.
The Orioles have released outfielder Delmon Young, the club announced. Young had been designated for assignment on July 1.  Baltimore had indicated that it was optimistic of finding a trade partner for Young, as it did previously with Alejandro De Aza. Despite the fact that the veteran is only owed a shade over $1MM the rest of the way, the O's were apparently not able to find a taker for a piece of that contract.  Young will surely draw interest on the free agent market. Though the 29-year-old is in the midst of a mediocre .270/.289/.339 campaign at present, he slashed a highly useful .302/.337/.442 in part-time play last year.
And with our 3rd Christmas comic in a row I'm coming to the conclusion that I might like the holiday season a bit too muuuch… NEXT WEEK IS THE LAST ONE I SWEAR. Maybe. 😉  Cuddlep00p Links  Patreon  Twitter  Imgur Mirror  Assistance  C0lornami – Colorist  Cool Friends Cool Art  Alouisse Ver Tumblr  Little Asteroid (friends webcomic)
Tesla President reveals key insight into company forecasts; Gigafactory will cut battery costs in half [Video]  Earlier this Spring, at the International Fleet meeting at the Geneva Motor Show, the keynote speaker was Jon McNeill, President of Global Sales & Service at Tesla Motors [NASDAQ: TSLA]. Also, this past week, McNeill spoke at the Belron conference in Lisbon. In both talks, McNeill revealed some unique insights into Tesla's business forecasts. McNeill joined Tesla last fall after his former role as CEO of Enservio where he was named "Most Admired CEO" by the Boston Business Journal . Before that, McNeill co-founded Sterling Collision Centers where he was able to reduce industry repair times by 90% (from 18 days to less than 2 days) while simultaneously growing the business at more than 40% per year. We've been excited to hear more from McNeill and he's delivered some intriguing information in these recent talks.  Image: Missionline  At the International Fleet Meeting, McNeill addressed company targets at the Tesla Gigafactory: "Our aim there [at the Gigafactory] is to reduce the cost of the battery - which is the largest cost in the car - by half." McNeill's estimate for a 50% decrease in battery pack cost differs from prior forecasts from Tesla (see slide from prior 2013 Tesla presentation below) that officially state a 30% decrease in battery pack cost. Since 2013, Tesla CEO Elon Musk and co-founder JB Straubel have repeatedly used the 30% target publicly. Did McNeill give an "internal" Gigafactory target to the public? If so, forecasting a 50% decrease demonstrates a newfound confidence in the Gigafactory to drive down battery costs.  Above: Note the prediction at the bottom of this older Tesla slide from a prior 2013 presentation claiming a 30% reduction in battery pack cost (Source: Treehugger via Tesla Motors)  When speaking about Tesla's approach to engineering, McNeill explained some interesting parallels with Tesla CEO Elon Musk's other company SpaceX: "To increase range from that battery pack, we had to lighten up the chassis as much as possible. And so we use all aluminum construction to do that. We borrow some technology from our sister company SpaceX to do very lightweight welds and high-strength welds in an all-aluminm chassis… it is a rocket ship literally… when you hit the accelerator that car leaps forward."   Youtube: Menadzerfloty.pl  And this past week, McNeill spoke [see video below] about the Tesla Model 3 and the automaker's expectations for reservations occurring within the first month of pre-orders being open. According to InsideEVs, "Before the introduction of the Model 3, the Tesla top-executives held a poll about the number of reservations. Jon McNeill, president of global sales, had the highest numbers with 135,000... [yet] 373,000 Model 3's have been pre-ordered. In other words, three times more than initially predicted."  Youtube: eGear Media  Looking at these two recent talks, it's surprising that McNeill's estimate for the first month of Model 3 orders was the highest on Tesla's executive team but still 3x lower than the actual number of first month pre-orders. Furthermore, it's critical to reconsider Tesla's overall Model 3 cost structure if Tesla is able to halve its battery pack costs. In any event, we look forward to hearing more from McNeill.  Next →  ← Previous
On Sunday, President Barack Obama traveled to Afghanistan to do a photo op with the troops amid fallout from the burgeoning Veterans Administration scandal. Announcing his visit, the White House promptly released a list of guests, including the name of the top CIA officer in Afghanistan. That officer is responsible for intelligence and drone warfare. The information was sent to over 6,000 email addresses.  Oops.  This is not the first time the Obama administration has compromised national security with leaks, either purposeful or inadvertent.  SEAL Team Six. After the killing of Osama Bin Laden, the Obama administration steadfastly refused to say which element of the US military had participated in the assault. Until Vice President Joe Biden decided to talk about it on national television, that is. Speaking at Washington's Ritz Carlton Hotel in the days after the Bin Laden kill, Biden stated, "Admiral James Stavridis is the real deal. He can tell you more about and understands the incredible, the phenomenal, the just almost unbelievable capacity of his Navy SEALs and what they did last Saturday… I was in absolute awe of the capacity and the dedication of the entire team, both the intelligence community, the CIA, the SEALs."  This put a target on the backs of the SEALs. That target came with consequences, when a SEAL team helicopter was downed in Afghanistan, killing 17.  Al Qaeda Tapes. On August 3, 2013, the Obama administration closed 22 embassies around the world based on intelligence supposedly received about potential al Qaeda attacks. That drew blowback thanks to the juxtaposition of the closings with news of the National Security Agency surveillance of Americans. Then, on August 7, 2013, Eli Lake and Josh Rogin of the Daily Beast reported that the Obama administration had taped a conference call with al Qaeda and revealed details of that call – details that CNN had not released after a "request from an Obama administration official not to publish or broadcast additional details because of the sensitivity of the information."  Al Qaeda Message Boards. The following week, on August 14, the Associated Press quoted "intelligence officials" to the effect that the government had been monitoring chat rooms and message boards – leaks that could undermine the future of US surveillance of al Qaeda. The AP report specifically noted that the surveillance used was linked to the NSA: "Exactly how U.S. spy systems picked up the latest threat is classified… Intelligence officials have suggested that the plot was detected, in part at least, through NSA surveillance programs that have been under harsh worldwide criticism for privacy intrusions in the name of national security."  The Obama administration, which has a strong habit of prosecuting leakers, did nothing about these leaks. Why? Because they justified the closings of the embassies, as well as the NSA surveillance.  The Obama Kill List. In May 2012, the New York Times featured the inside scoop about President Obama's kill list. In the midst of a re-election cycle in which Obama was being excoriated for weakness on terrorism, the Times quoted Obama and dozens of aides about the president's tough guy decisions to take out terrorists. Those quoted included National Security Advisor Thomas Donilon, who stated, "He is determined that he will make these decisions about how far and wide these operations will go… His view is that he's responsible for the position of the United States in the world." Even Senator Dianne Feinstein (D-CA) thought this leak was over the top: "It's dismayed our allies. It puts American lives in jeopardy. It puts our nation's security in jeopardy."  Leaking crucial national security information is nothing new for this administration. But leaks have consequences.  Ben Shapiro is Senior Editor-At-Large of Breitbart News and author of the New York Times bestseller "Bullies: How the Left's Culture of Fear and Intimidation Silences America" (Threshold Editions, January 8, 2013). He is also Editor-in-Chief of TruthRevolt.org. Follow Ben Shapiro on Twitter @benshapiro.
Advertisement  Photo-Illustration: Sinelab; Original photo: Gabriela Hasbun  Philip Rosedale, the Willy Wonka of virtual reality, is giving me a tour of his bustling office in San Francisco in August when his blue eyes sparkle with a better idea. "Let's just go in-world instead," he suggests. I follow him to a windowless back room. Waiting there for us are a large HDTV screen, a computer, a few cardboard boxes, and two small, black infrared light-emitting beacons that point down from the high corners.  We slip on our beveled, black HTC Vive headsets, and my eyes adjust to the virtual world. Instantly, I'm teleported to a large living room filled with playthings. A dart board hangs on the wall, a jukebox sits in the corner, a craps table stands beside me. Bows and arrows litter the floor. "My God, it's a mess in here," he says through my headset.
"There was a little bit of unrest at first," he said. "But we jumped up and started cracking jokes. Jane used to make like 10 announcements a day, so we pretended to be her, like, 'Hello, this is Jane, and I just want to let you know we are broken down in the middle of nowhere and soon some tugboats are gonna come.' That got some people laughing."
Photo: Tobias Lundgren / Aftonbladet Esport  We at Luminosity have always had a competitive approach to signing talent. We would like to represent the Americas region with the best and brightest team available. To that effect, Luminosity have decided to sign the ex-Keyd Stars team, who were left without an organisation in the week after ESWC 2015. Going into ESL One Cologne as a Legends team, from having finished in the top 8 at the last CS:GO major, the Brazilian team have a huge burden on their shoulders to perform well and we believe that they are more than up to the challange. This also means that the Luminosity sticker will be available for purchase on the Steam market!  With the addition of Dexterity's Marcelo "cold" David, the team have improved upon their in-house issues and are now looking to have a deep playoff run at ESL One Cologne. Gabriel "FalleN" Toledo will assume full time awping duties, while Marcelo "cold" David will be the secondary awper. Along with the addition of Marcelo, the team has also inlisted the services of former Brazilian champion, Renato "nak" Nakano. Renato will bring a long line of competitive counter strike success and experience to the team, and look to assume the administrative roles associated with being a coach, in an effort to allow the team to focus on playing.   To that effect, the team will be bootcamping at the ESC Gaming bootcamp house in Cologne, Germany between August 8th-18th, and will also be running a 24/7 live stream from the bootcamp.  With these changes, the current CS:GO lineup of Lex, anger, ptr, pyth, and devilwalk will now be going under the name of Mythic ahead of their own attempts to qualify for ESL One Cologne in the North American offline qualifier this upcoming weekend in Burbank, California. The LG management is in talks with other organizations and companies actively trying to find them a new home. Interested partries may email info@luminosity.gg for more information.  The new LG lineup is:  Gabriel "FalleN" Toledo  Fernando "fer" Alvarenga  Lucas "steel" Lopes  Ricardo "boltz" Prass  Marcelo "cold" David  Renato "nak" Nakano (coach)
With macOS High Sierra rolling out, it's time to get ready for the upgrade. Part of that means learning how well Time Machine and APFS play together. If your Mac has all-flash storage, you'll automatically be converted to APFS. The new file system is already in use across iOS, tvOS, and watchOS. Let's look at what this new file system means for Apple's backup solution, Time Machine.  Time Machine and APFS Do Play Nice, Sorta  Apple has recently published a support article for system administrators regarding APFS and macOS High Sierra. The most important thing to know about Time Machine and APFS is that you'll still be able to back up your data after converting your Mac to APFS. You don't need to change any settings to back up APFS-formatted disks.  With that said, Time Machine share points have to utilize SMB instead of AFP. Since Apple has deprecated AppleTalk Filing Protocol, APFS only supports SMB and NFS share points. Hopefully you don't have too many AFP share points to change.  Time Machine Can't Use APFS Directly  APFS doesn't support hard links to directories, and Time Machine depends upon them. These are directory entries that associate a name with a directory or file on a system. The term usually applies to file systems that allow more than one hard link for the same file or directory. In the case of APFS, your Mac automatically converts any directory hard links you may have to symbolic links as you transition to the new file system.  This has a huge impact on Time Machine, which depends upon these directory hard links to work its magic. When Time Machine makes its first backup, it copies everything and then makes a dated folder, where it places hard links to the files it's already backed up. The second backup uses more hard links for unchanged files, copying new or modified files into the dated folder for that second and each successive backup.  The fact that Apple's new file system doesn't support hard links to directories means you can't use an APFS-formatted disk as your Time Machine backup drive. If you attempt it, Time Machine will automatically convert the volume back to HFS+ and use the drive that way.  Other APFS Tidbits  Here are a few other things you should probably know about APFS and how it works with your Mac.
I was totally surprised to come home today to not just one, but TWO packages on my doorstep! I opened them in a hurry because I was so excited.  I received a wonderful book, "Designer Cross Stitch Projects" with over 100 contemporary patterns. I like to make a lot of patterns myself, and I will definitely use this very frequently for reference. I also like to work on smaller projects to keep me going through a giant cross stitch I'm working on, so it'll be fun to do some of these!  I also received an absolutely beautiful kit. I can't wait to start this! It's super intricate and I've never done a piece like this, so I am totally excited. So much backstitching! It really is a work of art.  Thank you, Santa! I will be appreciating these gifts for a long, long time. :)
Bateman Skincare's range of unisex products balance our youthful spirits with an equally vibrant exterior. An extensive infusion of Hyaluronic Acid in our creams and serums stimulates our body's natural oil free moisturizer and anti-ager which diminishes as we age.  Daily use of our Rose Hip & Seaweed Cleanser will provide your skin with vitamins that help influence collagen growth and contribute to firmer smoother skin. A periodic application of our Zinc & Clay Mask will cleanse, restore and reinvigorate.  By creating a Toner with a functional herbal formula along with the building block of life, Water, and Hyaluronic Acid our line of products will contribute to tighten your skin, shrink pores, balance pH levels, and protect all different skin types.  All our products are Vegan and Cruelty Free with respect to the harmony of our surroundings that are continuously disrupted by our imbalanced nature.  You are your own best asset and without you there is no us.
Welcome  Dubie Family Maple is a family owned and operated business, nestled in the heart of Vermont Maple Country on the shores of Fairfield Pond in Franklin County. Dubie Family Maple is proud to contribute to Vermont's excellent maple tradition. We love our state and its reputation for superior products. We trust you will fall in love with Dubie Family Maple Products.
Ron Chenoy-USA TODAY Sports  When NFL free agency opened on March 12, football fans around the globe were anxiously awaiting to learn what teams the top-impact players were joining.  Fast-forward 18 days and roughly 225 free-agent deals later, the picture becomes clearer as to which teams have really improved themselves the most in free agency.  So, which team should be declared the winner of 2013 free agency so far? Can a team lose one of their best defensive players and still be considered the best NFL team in free agency? There can only be one winner, but we can and will acknowledge a handful of other teams that belong in the conversation.  Our more inquisitive readers will want to know how we are defining the concept of "Winning Free Agency", which is a valid topic worthy of discussion.  For the purposes of this presentation, the team ultimately selected as the winner of free agency will have to meet these four qualifications.  1) The team added more quality players to their roster than they lost during free agency.  As an example, the Cincinnati Be ng als signed a number of their own free agents, but that doesn't change the level of talent from the 2012 team. Th e Bengals talent level basically stayed the same.  Even though they added some excellent players at reasonable prices, this condition eliminates the Baltimore Ravens, who lost as much talent in free agency as they gained. They also lost some key leadership skills when Ed Reed bolted to Houston.  The New York Giants added Josh Brown, Ryan Mundy, Dan Connor and Cullen Jenkins. They re-signed Will Beatty and Kevin Boothe. But they lost Martellus Bennett, Kenny Phillips, Chris Canty, Osi Umenyiora and will eventually lose Ahmad Bradshaw. The talent leaving is equal to or more than what they brought in.  Another team that was active in free agency, but lost as much talent as they acquired was the New England Patriots. Signed Danny Amendola and Donald Jones and brought back Sebastian Vollmer, Aqib Talib and Kyle Arrington. But losing Wes Welker, Donald Thomas, Danny Woodhead and Patrick Chung negates the gains.  2) There has been an upgrade of talent via free agency (not by trades) in at least one core position for any NFL team; quarterback, wide receiver, tackle, pass rush or cornerback.  NFL teams use free agency to help address their core position needs, which discourages teams from reaching for a quarterback, cornerback, tackle or wide receiver in the draft.  The purpose of this article is to focus on free agency, so players acquired via trade won't be a factor. For our purposes here, that diminishes the impact of Alex Smith and Percy Harvin. If we wanted to include trades, the title of this article would have been "Which Team Won the 2013 Offseason?".  3) Display some degree of financial responsibility to your organization's future salary cap.  Backloading deals that help the 2013 season but will come back to haunt teams down the road is the reason that the Miami Dolphins won't be in the running for the best team in free agency. GM Jeff Ireland worked out deals that were salary-cap friendly for 2013, but will limit what the Dolphins can do in 2014 and beyond.  4) Not overpaying for mediocre talent.  According to this article by Walter Football.com, Tennessee and Kansas City can be dismissed from consideration due to overpaying for a number of free agents. Tennessee went overboard on Andy Levitre, Shonn Greene and Delanie Walker, while Kansas City overpaid for Dunta Robinson, Chase Daniel, Donnie Avery, Anthony Fasano and Sean Smith.  Now that we have identified our criteria, the teams that are in the running to be declared the winner of 2013 free agency are the Denver Broncos, Seattle Seahawks, Philadelphia Eagles and Atlanta Falcons.  Let's explore the deals that each of these four teams have made in greater detail, to help determine our eventual winner.  Denver Broncos: Have added quality players in WR Wes Welker, G Louis Vasquez, DT Terrance Knighton and CB Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie.  The Broncos improved on offense with the addition of All-Pro Welker (two-year deal for $12 million) and on the offensive line with Vasquez (four-year deal for $23.5 million). Welker is as reliable and productive as they come, and his addition will make Demaryius Thomas and Eric Decker even better. Vasquez will be a welcome addition in pass-protection. These upgrades should make Peyton Manning very happy.  On defense, the Broncos secondary improved with the addition of Rodgers-Cromartie, (one-year deal for $5 million), who has an opportunity to rejuvenate his career with a contender. Denver needed to beef up the defensive line, and they checked off that box
A court in Thessaloniki on Monday handed suspended seven-month prison sentences to two Muslim clerics after they took over prayers at a funeral service from a state-appointed preacher.  The two men were found guilty of disturbing a religious ceremony and usurping authority but their terms were suspended and they were released.  Greek law dictates the state appointment of Muslim religious officials but many Muslim communities use a parallel structure.  The funeral occurred in the summer of last year in the village of Glafki, near Xanthi, after a 19-year-old army conscript died in a swimming accident.  Five busloads of villagers traveled to the courthouse.
Apple  Tim Cook has twice been placed atop the list of highest-paid CEOs in recent weeks, and a new legal filing suggests he's not particularly greedy for more.  In a filing with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission today, Apple notes that Cook will not be taking the dividend equivalents on his restricted units, a detail of considerable importance given the grant of 1 million restricted stock units last year.  "At Mr. Cook's request, none of his restricted stock units will participate in dividend equivalents," the company said in the filing, which was flagged by MacRumors. "Assuming a quarterly dividend of $2.65 per share over the vesting periods of his 1.125 million outstanding restricted stock units, Mr. Cook will forego approximately $75 million in dividend equivalent value."  That massive share stock grant, which was unveiled in a January proxy filing, has restrictions that keep Cook from collecting the first half of the shares until 2016, with the other half in 2021.  Per the filing, the amount Cook would have received is part of a newly approved amendment that applies to outstanding and unvested restricted stock units. These units get a pay-out equal to the dividend on the company's common stock, but that amount cannot be collected until the stock vests. The decision was made by the compensation committee of Apple's board, a committee on which Cook is not a member.  In late March, Apple announced plans to use some of its $100 billion cash pile to provide a $2.65 per share quarterly dividend beginning in the fourth quarter of its fiscal 2012, which begins on July 1. That same plan also included a $10 billion share repurchase program, which begins in September.
A woman was beheaded by a train as she had sex inches from the world famous Trans-Siberian railway track.  Her lover survived the dangerous tryst close to Zaudinskaya station in remote Buryatia region.  The woman was on top of her partner when she heard the train approaching, but as she stood up for a mid-romp recess, the train took her head off.  Couple were romping close to Zaudinskaya railway station in Ulan-Ude, pictured, when the incident occurred  The woman was on top of her partner when she heard the train approaching, but as she stood up for a mid-romp recess, the train took her head off  A Russian Railways source said: 'The woman was on top of her partner and when she heard an approaching train, she started to stand up,' said a Russian Railways source.  'Right then, the speeding train tore her head off.  'Had she remained in her previous position, she would have stayed alive. The man survived.'  The case was highlighted amid concern over the number of accidents with people crossing railway lines in Russia  The moment of passion was near Zaudinskaya railway station in suburbs of Ulan-Ude, the regional capital.  Local sources have said amorous couple were homeless people who were 'both drunk', according to The Siberian Times.  The pair were not named.  The moment of passion was near Zaudinskaya railway station in suburbs of Ulan-Ude, the regional capital  The case was highlighted amid concern over the number of accidents with people crossing railway lines in Russia.  Amid the freak incident, the train company issued a warning, saying: 'Dear citizens, Russian Railways yet again ask you to respect health and safety rules,' said the company which operates trains across Russia.
INDIANA — Several people were injured after an apparent accident involving a golf cart at the Brickyard 400 Sunday at Indianapolis Motor Speedway.  At least four people were transported to Methodist Hospital after the cart struck pedestrians walking through the tunnel. Two more victims were treated for minor injuries at the scene, FOX59 reported.  The the tunnel near Turn 2 was closed. It was unclear if police placed anyone under arrest.  The tunnel closest to Turn 2 near the IMS museum is blocked off after an "accident," according to police at the track #Brickyard400 pic.twitter.com/hQUxGOSya1 — FOX59 News (@FOX59) July 23, 2017
Hours after pop sensation Justin Bieber arrived in Mumbai on Wednesday, another top 40 star, Ed Sheeran, announced that he will perform in the city on November 19. Sheeran's official website put out a post listing his dates for various cities during his tour of Asia in October and November. Mumbai is the only Indian city on his list.  Sheeran had originally tweeted that he would come to India on April 1. The tweet was later taken off his feed, leading some to speculate that he was merely thinking out loud.  Sheeran's announcement comes at a time when the frenzy around Bieber's performance in India, part of his "Purpose" tour, has been immense. The 23-year-old has been criticised for supposedly making exorbitant, Orientalist demands, and fans have lined up for hours at the airport before he even arrived. Others have argued that his music is all that matters, and shelled out exorbitant sums for tickets.
The federal government is still paying out millions of dollars a year in subsidies to dead farmers, according to a new government audit released Monday that said the Agriculture Department doesn't do routine checks required to make sure it is paying benefits to the right people.  The Government Accountability Office said that from 2008 to 2012 one agency, the Natural Resources Conservation Service, made $10.6 million payments on behalf of more than 1,100 people who'd been dead at least a year. Another branch, the Risk Management Agency, paid out $22 million to more than 3,400 policyholders who'd been dead at least two years.  Some of the payments may have been legal because they were for work done before the farmers died, but GAO said the problem is the two agencies don't perform the routine checks — such as looking at the Social Security lists — to see.  "Until and unless NRCS and RMA develop and implement procedures to have their payment or subsidy data records matched against SSA's complete death master file, either through coordination with FSA or on their own, these agencies cannot know if they are providing payments to, or subsidies on behalf of, deceased individuals; how often they are providing such payments or subsidies; or in what amounts," the investigators wrote.  GAO said the Agriculture Department has shown some progress since a previous audit found hundreds payments to 172,801 dead people, totaling some $1.1 billion, between 1999 and 2005.  And the current rate of potentially bad payments is slim compared to the overall budget for subsidies, which runs to about $20 billion a year.  In its official response to the audit, the Agriculture Department said it does have some procedures in place to check to see if it is paying live beneficiaries.  But the department acknowledged their procedures "were not effectively and consistently implemented to identify deceased individuals."  Near the end of the GAO's yearlong audit, the Agriculture Department signed an agreement to begin to get the Social Security Administration's death master file, so it can begin checking names of those it is paying.   Copyright © 2018 The Washington Times, LLC. Click here for reprint permission.
Toronto FC announced the signing of veteran free-agent defender Jason Hernandez on Tuesday, pending receipt of his International Transfer Certificate (ITC).  Hernandez, 33, joins Toronto after two seasons with New York City FC, who declined his contract option at the conclusion of 2016. This year will mark his 13th season in MLS. Primarily a center back, he previously played for the MetroStars (now Red Bulls), Chivas USA and the San Jose Earthquakes.  "We are pleased to add another experienced, veteran defender in Jason Hernandez," said TFC general manager Tim Bezbatchenko in a club release. "Jason is a player we have watched for some time. With his experience in MLS including the playoffs and his familiarity with some of our current players we felt he would be a welcomed addition to our club."  Hernandez has made a combined 285 appearances in regular season and MLS Cup Playoffs action, and helped San Jose win the 2012 MLS Supporters' Shield alongside current TFC starters Justin Morrow and Steven Beitashour.  Eligible to represent Puerto Rico via his island-born parents, Hernandez made his international debut a year ago and holds three caps to date.
Sony will hold its Paris Games Week PlayStation conference on Tuesday, 27th October at 5pm UK time.  This is the first year Sony has held back from making a splash at Gamescom in Cologne to attend the French event instead.  It is the company's first major media presentation since E3 in June, when it dazzled by showing snatches of The Last Guardian, Shenmue 3 and Square Enix's Final Fantasy 7 remaster.  But we're unlikely to learn much more about any of those for a while.  Instead, expect to get a look at this Christmas' biggest PlayStation launches - so that's Uncharted: Nathan Drake Collection then and um...  In all seriousness, we're hoping for a No Man's Sky release date (although we'd now be surprised to see it this side of the New Year) and possibly a firmer launch window for Uncharted 4.  We may also see something of the next game from French developer Quantic Dream (Heavy Rain, Beyond: Two Souls), and the likes of Rime and Wild.  As usual we'll have live coverage of the conference to watch here on Eurogamer, along with reporting from the event itself.
There's Another Cow Off the Ice One of the tactics often used for solving intractable mathematical and physical problems is to simplify it until it does become solvable. Thus, we might assume an infinite surface rather than one with boundaries for the simple, if inconvenient, fact that physical systems grow irritable at the boundaries.  Or we might suppose a frictionless surface, an ideal gas, a perfectly elastic collision.  Think of the phrase "all else being equal."  They never are, but by assuming they are we might gain some insight into the more complex reality.  Ptolemy (and Copernicus) solved the orbits of each planet as a separate problem, and wound up with each planet orbiting a different center. The Systems of the World. The Copernican model (right) is not notably simpler than the Ptolemaic model (left).  It uses more epicycles; the Sun– like Ptolemy's Earth – is off-center; and each planet orbits a different center.  Note also the double epicycle for the Copernican Moon Newton, of course, solved the 2-body problem, not the 7-body problem. Ivar Eklund noted in Mathematics and the Unexpected that a billiards player attempting to calculate the motion of a seven-ball cannon would have to take account of the gravitational attraction of the spectators distributed about the table.  The further out a prediction runs, the more such things must be taken into account. In calculating orbits for satellites and Moon trips, NASA still uses geocentric math, not because it is factual, but because it is true within the times and distances involved. That is, it produces results that approximate reality "close enough."    There is No Such Thing as a Problem in General There are only problems in particular.  This was a favorite aphorism coined by TOF during his storied career as a quality consultant.  Quotidian problems like "too much scrap in the factory" are often intractable because it is not actually a problem.  It is many problems lumped under the same name, and each one of them has its own cause or causal nexus.  The problem-solver's first step is often to break the generic "problem" down into specific problems, a process called by Juran "Pareto Analysis." Pareto Analysis: breaking big unsolvable problems into small solvable ones. For example (above), "excessive steam usage" on a plant site making vitamins proceeded by first breaking steam usage down by building (66% of usage was in the building making product A), then by process step (36% of the steam in building A was used in Step 2), then by particular equipments (20% of the steam in Step 2 was used in Evaporator #2).  This provided a problem precisely defined around which one could wrap one's head.  Excessive steam usage on Evaporator #2 could be traced to specific physical factors, equipment could be inspected, leaking seals identified, damages repaired, and so on.  Excessive steam usage in general can only be ascribed to vague generic factors, much as in sociopolitical discourse, where all ills are ascribed to the vague and malignant spirit of G.W.Bush.   Naturally, one continues in this fashion, eating the big problem one bite at a time.  Never Eat Anything Bigger Than Your Head "All models are wrong, but some are useful." – George E. P. Box, "Robustness in the Strategy of Scientific Model Building" One of the problems the medievals had was that they tried to solve too much at once.  For them, motion was kinesis , all actualization of potentials.  So an orbiting planet, a ripening apple, and a maturing puppy dog were all in motion.  Try digging a theory of motion out of that , monkey boy.  So the moderns broke it all up into separate problems.  They reduced motion to local motion: to change only of location from change in general.  The morphogenesis of a puppy dog became a different problem, addressed be it noted with different tools.  The tools of physics are not entirely suited to the puppy dog.   This way they could make stunning progress within a limited domain.  But while this made specific problems more easily solvable to an approximation useful for the range of normal life, it glossed over the genuine complexity of the Ugly Reality™.  The model is elegant in its simplicity.  The world is not.  And just as the fish stinks from the head, the model begins to stink at the extremes, at the boundary conditions.  In an example using 153 consecutive heats of steel of a certain grade, the model predictions of the percentage to be expected above 90 ppm N2 accorded well with actual counts; but the predictions above 104 ppm diverged considerably.  A Normal Distribution goes off to infinity in both directions
Yes, indeed.  In fact, many people with Apnea issues are dying in every single day.  Some of them die later because of severe issues triggered by lack of sound sleep, while others taste death right in their sleeps.  It is true that when you are on a fight or flight mode, your brain will wake up. But unfortunately, it doesn't happen every time.  And that's why it is important for a person with Apnea to stay on alert. If you leave it untreated, soon it will be the ultimate cause of your death.  So be careful about this dangerous issue. And remember, it often starts from normal snoring. Because when you snore, your air-ways become partially obstructed.  So it's better to deal with it before it get's completely blocked.  One simple way you can address the Snoring issue is to use a Jaw Supporter. Because a Jaw Supporter would hold your lower jaw forward. So your tongue won't fall-back to your throat to block your air-ways with it's limp tissues.  Besides Jaw Supporter is a lot comfortable to wear compared to the CPAP machine. So for ones with mild apnea or snoring, I think Jaw Supporter is a good option to try out.  See here to learn more of it and how it works Jaw Supporter - An Easy Way To Address Snoring And OTA issues  Hope this helps  Cheers….
Kellyanne Conway, a top advisor to President Donald Trump, made her return to TV on Wednesday after a weeklong hiatus, and said family matters were to blame for her absence.  Media reports had suggested that the White House had suspended Conway from appearing on air. CNN, citing unnamed sources, reported that the high-profile Trump surrogate was sidelined for making statements that contradicted the administration's official stances. Conway also drew ire from the government's ethics watchdog, which urged the White House to investigate and possibly discipline Conway after she used a TV appearance to endorse Ivanka Trump's clothing line. In another appearance, she referenced the nonexistent "Bowling Green Massacre" while defending Trump's controversial travel ban. Conway also stated on-air that the administration had full confidence in National Security Advisor Michael Flynn just hours before Trump accepted his resignation. Those incidents prompted Morning Joe co-host Mika Brzezinski to tell viewers last week that Conway was "not credible anymore."  Conway, in denying she was ever benched by the White House, offered a different defense on Wednesday.  "I don't think I have to explain myself if I'm not going on TV if I'm out with four kids for three days looking at houses and schools," she said in an interview with Fox News' Sean Hannity from the floor of the Conservative Political Action Conference. She added: "A lot of my colleagues aren't trying to figure out how to be a mother of four kids, I assure you."  Subscribe to The World's Most Powerful Women, Fortune's daily must-read for global businesswomen.  That latter statement echoed concerns Conway voiced about the Trump administration's accommodation of working parents in December. At the time, she seemed to suggest that she might turn down a White House job because it would be incompatible with caring for a young family. She has four children under age 12 and a husband who works full-time as a litigator.  At Politico's Women Rule event, Conway said that women have more opportunities for roles in government and politics, but that they are limited by the choices they must make. She recalled talks about a possible role in the White House, saying that senior campaign officials would tell her, "I know you have four kids but…"  "I said there's nothing that comes after the 'but' that makes any sense to me so don't even try. Like what is the but?" she said:  "But they'll eat Cheerios for the rest of the day? Nobody will brush their teeth again until I get home? And I do politely mention to them the question isn't would you take the job, the male sitting across from me who's going to take a big job in the White House. The question is would you want your wife to. Would you want the mother of your children to? You really see their entire visage change. It's like, 'Oh, no, they wouldn't want their wife to take that job.' But it's, it's all good."  Conway, of course, did end up taking a prominent role in the Trump administration, but the comments she made to Hannity are correct in that she's lacking female colleagues who might be facing the same familiar pressures. (Certainly men working in the White House could be juggling caregiving responsibilities, as well, but her comments cited mothers, specifically.) Trump's cabinet of 23 advisors features just four women, and a USA Today analysis found that even at the aide level, men outnumber women 2 to 1.
You can get notifications on your phone, computer, or by email to help easily remember events. You can change your settings for a single event, or all your events.  To easily remember events, you can get notifications on your phone, computer, or by email. You can change your settings for a single event, or all your events.  Change your notification settings  When you get a notice on your computer, you'll get it on your phone.  Turn notifications on or off On your computer, open Google Calendar. In the top right, click Settings Settings. On the left, click General Event settings. Under "Event settings," you can choose to: Turn notifications on or off: Click Notifications , and select how you want to get them.  Click , and select how you want to get them. Get notified only for Yes or Maybe responses: Click Automatically add invitations Yes, but don't send event notifications unless I have responded "Yes" or "Maybe.". Note: You need to have Google Calendar open in your browser, like Chrome and Safari, to change settings. You might be asked to let calendar.google.com show notifications. "Browser doesn't support notifications" error This error means you need to update your web browser to get notices for events.  Change event notifications Open Google Calendar. Click the event. Click Edit Next to Notifications , choose how you'd like to be notified. At the top of the page, click Save. Note: When you make changes, they don't affect anyone else who's invited to the event.
Gratitude journals and their more public cousins—gratitude Facebook posts—have become mindful ways to connect with what is good in our lives. I've never done one, but it occurred to me a while back that doing a 365 Grateful for playwriting might illuminate a year's worth of reasons why we're so loyal to this sometimes discouraging pursuit. In 2014, there were many times I became aware of people, situations, events that only touched me because I wrote that first play and kept on writing–a phone call from a producer who wanted to share the tearful reactions my play evoked that evening, being part of the Buffalo theater community, meeting some super cool people during a production in a small town in the Catskills, the Dramatists Guild regional reps meeting, having actors in Ghana speak my words– as well as all the people, places, and things that just make it easier to keep on. Productions are wonderful, but being a playwright has generated so many rewards beyond just those, so, this year, now that Real Inspiration for Playwrights Project is finished, recording them all is my project for 2015. I'll tweet once each day under #365gratefulplaywright (follow me @donnahoke) and also post to my Donna Hoke, Playwright page on Facebook, then post the updated blog every two weeks so that nobody is overwhelmed. (I'll also start a new blog post every two weeks, so that this file doesn't become impossible!) If you're a playwright, think about what might go on your own list; it's humbling to see how lucky we really are. And so, continuing on with November/Part Two, AS A PLAYWRIGHT,  November 16: After three years of development, my first glimpse of SAFE, courtesy of the workshop production at Saginaw Valley State University.  November 17: The incredible Marshall Fredericks Sculpture Museum–a great bonus on the Saginaw Valley State University campus. Also a great playwright meet in David MacGregor, who drove an hour to meet us for breakfast.  November 18: Opening night! The BETA collaboration between Saginaw Valley State University and Road Less Traveled has been invaluable in the continued development of SAFE as we prepare for productions at Road Less Traveled in March and Queer Theatre Kalamazoo in August. (And also great thanks to Laura K. Henderson and Kevin Dodd who traveled from Kalamazoo to see this!)  November 19: The baseball coach who suddenly started sending me life advice viewed through the lens of baseball. I posted a great one about Embracing the Grind on my Donna Hoke, Playwright page the other day, but here's another: When faced at a crossroads of objective opinions ALWAYS choose curiosity. Staying curious absolutely defines the greatest people in every field.  November 20: Thirty awesome playwrights who submitted scripts for the January 9 event, WNY Playwrights Celebrate the Work of Charles Burchfield. This is proof of our strong and growing community.  November 21: This on the Saginaw Valley State University theater wall: It was wonderful to witness those jaw-dropping pin-silences from an entranced audience; relish them as you've surely earned them!  November 22: Awesome playwright friends across the country who are always willing to attend the stuff you can't get to and give you detailed reports. I can't even count the number of times I had eyes and ears in other states on my behalf, most recently William Duell in Houston at Theatre Southwest.  November 23: Irene Ryan nominations for two of the SAFE actors in Saginaw: Joe Green and Tristian Evanoff ! So proud of them!  November 24: A new person to trade play feedback with. Good ones are so hard to find!  November 25: The perfect antidote to a sad day—six of my favorite Buffalo actors making me laugh in PAGEANT.  November 26: Thanksgiving. As this is the actual day and it's been a difficult week not just for my family, but for many others, I'm not going to be grateful for anything specific in my playwright life, but for having all the kids home, watching the parade (with Buffalo's own Gail Golden as Mrs. Claus) while we make stuffing and pies, and being surrounded by family who is here. I wish a peaceful day to all.  November 27: Being rejected in very good company. It helps ease the sting, as does seeing deserving talents among the finalists.  November 28: The traditional post-Thanksgiving Saturday theater doubleheader with my daughter, preceded my book signing at the Buffalo History Museum. I can't believe we didn't even get one picture of our marathon day!  November 29: Collaboration with Naatak that is allowing me to revise SAFE to make it resonate more with their Indian audiences. It's both a great opportunity
Leeds owner Massimo Cellino 'good to work with' says club's new executive director  Leeds United owner Massimo Cellino 'has a massive passion for the club'  New Leeds United executive director Adam Pearson has extolled the virtues of the club's eccentric owner Massimo Cellino.  He has described the Italian as being 'effervescent' and 'good to work with,' and Pearson says he is pleased to be back at Elland Road where he was once the commercial director.  Regarding his relationship with Cellino, Pearson told Sky Sports News HQ: "He's certainly effervescent behind the scenes. He's on holiday at the moment, which is great. We've done a lot in the last two weeks.  "I find him very good to work with. He's got a massive passion for the club, and is very energetic."  The 50-year-old Pearson also praised Cellino for securing the signature of Kiwi striker Chris Wood last month.  Pearson added: "We had our targets at the start of the season and when it came to nearly losing Chris, he came up with £3m to get the player and move him up from the midlands. He's going to be a big signing for us."  A more recent purchase is midfielder Stuart Dallas who moves north from Brentford and Pearson went on: "It's another seven-figure fee which shows the owner's commitment to putting the club right."  He's got a massive passion for the club, and is very energetic. Pearson on Cellino  Pearson, the former owner of Hull City, was brought into the club during pre-season to try and steer the Yorkshire giants back to the top flight of the English game.  The Whites have not graced the Premier League since 2004 but Pearson is upbeat about their immediate future "The club is as clean as it has been in 11 years.  "It's in a really good state, playing squad is well-balanced, wages are right, crowds our coming back. We're hoping to have 30 thousand against Burnley this week.  "It's a Premier League club in waiting. We've brought seven good players in and moved 16 out and I think we'll have a good season.  "We've cut the wage bill, got 21 competitive players in the first team squad, we look strong in all areas of the pitch."  Watch Leeds v Burnley live on Sky this Saturday. 12.30 kick-off.
On Twitter this morning, an ex-Baltimore police sergeant named Michael A. Wood detailed a litany of abuses he witnessed or participated in while on the job. Even if your faith in cops to do the right thing has been completely demolished over the past several years—or if it was never there to begin with—you'll almost certainly find something new that turns your stomach.  Wood's tweetstorm—which I first saw on the Kinja blog The Salad Bowl—comes in the wake of Freddie Gray's death by spinal injury in the custody of Baltimore police in April. Gray's death forced the Baltimore police into the national spotlight, but the department has a long history of abuse, particularly against black and low-income Baltimoreans. Wood—who served in various roles in the police department between 2003 and 2014, according to his LinkedIn profile—provides the gruesome specifics of that abuse.   So here we go. I'm going to start Tweeting the things I've seen & participated in, in policing that is corrupt, intentional or not. June 24, 2015  A detective slapping a completely innocent female in the face for bumping into him, coming out of a corner chicken store. June 24, 2015  Punting a handcuffed, face down, suspect in the face, after a foot chase. My handcuffs, not my boot or suspect June 24, 2015  CCTV cameras turning as soon as a suspect is close to caught. June 24, 2015  Presumably, he means CCTV cameras "turning off"—so they don't catch the violence the cops inflict when they catch up with their suspects.  Targeting 16-24 year old black males essentially because we arrest them more, perpetrating the circle of arresting them more. June 24, 2015  Pissing and shitting inside suspects homes during raids, on their beds and clothes. June 24, 2015  Shitting on people's clothes!  Swearing in court and PC docs that suspect dropped CDS during unbroken visual pursuit when neither was true. June 24, 2015  That is, lying under oath in court and in probable cause affidavits that he saw a person drop controlled dangerous substances—drugs—while chasing them.  Jacking up and illegally searching thousands of people with no legal justification June 24, 2015  Having other people write PC statements, who were never there because they could twist it into legality. June 24, 2015  Asking people who weren't present at the scene of an incident to lie and say that they were on a probable cause affidavit, which Wood and his colleagues could later use to obtain a search or arrest warrant.  Summonsing officers who weren't there so they could collect the overtime. June 24, 2015  A ploy to collect extra money for your colleagues, which Wood and another tweeter helpfully explain below.  @snarkyRedhd @MichaelAWoodJr So officers get summonsed for court to appear at trials or meetings. This can be on overtime which is $$$ June 24, 2015  @snarkyRedhd exactly. Summonsing is stating that these people are necessary witnesses for the state's case. June 24, 2015  After many people responded to Wood's tweets in anger that he hadn't come forward sooner—while he was still employed by the BPD, maybe—he offered this alarming bit of ostensible justification.  What's really hard to convey is that some things are so common place, they didn't register until I was on the other side. June 24, 2015  At the end of that horrifying string of anecdotes, Wood wrote that he may tweet more tomorrow.  I'll do some each day so that we have time for ?s, reflections, and improvement inbetween. The light of transparency will clean us up. June 24, 2015
By Ann Leckie  In most book series, and particularly in the sci-fi/fantasy genres, the narrative universe tends to grow and expand with each new book. It's a rare series that narrows in focus over time, and off the top of my head, I can't recall another sci-fi "space opera" type that fits that descriptor, with the notable exception of Leckie's Imperial Radch series, which concludes with Ancillary Mercy.  As blog readers will recall, I found the series' initial installment, Ancillary Justice, to be a show-stopper. I loved the flashbacks to Breq's former existence as a multi-bodied AI, and found the universe of the Radch to be both mysterious and intriguing. Like many other authors before her, however, Leckie seemed to struggle a bit with the "middle" book of the series (Ancillary Sword) which seemed a bit slow and myopic compared to book one.  Book three picks up just where book two had left off, with Breq continuing to try to maintain control of the Athoek system, and opposing the machinations of the many-bodied ruler of the Radch, Anaander Mianaai. But like book two, much of the actual narrative of the book is devoted to Breq's relationships, both to the members of her crew, and to the inhabitants of Athoek. (I notice that one of the prominent Amazon reviews refers to the book as being more "soap opera" than "space opera," and I'm inclined to agree.) While I'm not normally a fan of that kind of narrative (it's part of what I didn't love about Cherryh's Morgaine books), I think Leckie does an admirable job of tugging on the readers' sympathies. Even as the pace slowed in books two and three, I found myself rooting hard for Breq, even as I occasionally reminded myself that Breq was an android (sort of).  Unfortunately, while the narrowing of scope does allow for some increased attention on the characters' emotional state, it doesn't help with the overall arc of the story, which seems underdeveloped. As in book two, Ancillary Mercy's conclusion seems rushed and unsatisfying, and I thought Leckie's resolution re. Anaander Mianaai felt forced. Don't get me wrong, this is a good book, but it suffers in comparison to book one, which is unfortunate.  Final analysis: if you've gotten through book two, by all means, finish the series. Though I thought books two and three represented a step down from the start of the series, I was never tempted to stop reading, and I would happily read future stories about the Radch. If you don't mind a little "soap opera" mixed in with your "space opera," this could be the series for you!  Rating 2- Recommended with Reservations  If you like this, you may enjoy: A Fire Upon the Deep, House of Suns.
Campus Challenge 2016  Campus Challenge 2016 is finished!  Please see the official announcement of the winners for the final results and prizes.  You can still visit the leaderboard to see the top ranked universities.  Thanks to everyone who participated!
Travis Interviews Archenemy Prolly: "Next Time We Play SKT, I Think That Game's Gonna Be Ours for Sure" Travis talks to Prolly after H2k's game vs SKT at the start of Worlds.  Filed under: League of Legends
15mm BESA ‎ > ‎ 15mm BESA Armour Piercing & Armour Piercing Tracer   Armour Piercing   The armour piercing round was "Cartridge S.A. Armour Piercing 15mm W Mark I" if loaded with cordite or Mark Iz when loaded nitro-cellulose. The Mark Iz round was approved in June 1940 and shown in LoC Paragraph B.3738 dated August 1940.   The Design was DD/L/10003 (later DD/L/14011) and the bullet was boat tailed with a gilding metal envelope with a lead/antimony tip filler and hard steel core. It had two narrow driving bands formed in the envelope. Bullet weight was 1160 grains and the propellant charge was 325 grains of Cordite for the W Mark I and 370 grains of nitro-cellulose for the W Mark Iz.   Velocity at 90 feet was 2,900 feet per second at a maximum mean pressure of 22 tsi and penetration was seven out of ten shots must penetrate 27mm armour plate at 100 yards.   The headstamp should include the code "WI" or "WIZ" and the primer annulus was green.   The marking of 15mm BESA rounds however did not always strictly follow specification and early rounds, whatever the loading, were headstamped with maker and date and "15mmWZ". Also some armour piercing rounds will be found with a green tip.   The W Mark I and Iz was declared obsolete in January 1945.   Illustrated is an early 15mm BESA Armour Piercing round with unusual green tip. Headstamp is "K 40 15mmWZ"   Armour piercing W Mark Iz stamped (i) "WIZ" and (r) "WZ"   Armour Piercing Tracer   The "Cartridge S.A. Armour Piercing Tracer 15mm W.G. Mark Iz" was approved in August 1941 and shown in LoC Paragraph B.5434 dated December 1941. The Design was DD/L/11121 (later DD/L/14011) and the bullet was boat tailed with a gilding metal envelope with a lead/antimony tip filler and hard steel core drilled at the base to take the tracer compound. It had two narrow driving bands formed in the envelope. Bullet weight was 1150 grains and the propellant charge was 360 grains of nitro-cellulose.   The trace composition consisted of 6 grains of SR368 with 6 grains of SR 370 priming compound and the trace was for 800 yards.   Velocity at 90 feet was 2,900 feet per second at a maximum mean pressure of 22 tsi and penetration was seven out of ten shots must penetrate 27mm armour plate at 100 yards.   The headstamp usually included the code "WGIZ" but as with other loads early cases were headstamped "WZ" but with a red stripe across the head. Most had a green primer annulus but some had a purple annulus.   The WG Mark Iz was declared obsolescent in October 1946.   Left. Armour Piercing Tracer WG Mark Iz   Right: Armour Piercing Tracer WG Mark Iz Since the 15mm BESA equipped armoured cars and light tanks, armour piercing and armour piercing tracer were the main ammunition types used.The armour piercing round wasif loaded with cordite or Mark Iz when loaded nitro-cellulose. The Mark Iz round was approved in June 1940 and shown in LoC Paragraph B.3738 dated August 1940.The Design was DD/L/10003 (later DD/L/14011) and the bullet was boat tailed with a gilding metal envelope with a lead/antimony tip filler and hard steel core. It had two narrow driving bands formed in the envelope. Bullet weight was 1160 grains and the propellant charge was 325 grains of Cordite for the W Mark I and 370 grains of nitro-cellulose for the W Mark Iz.Velocity at 90 feet was 2,900 feet per second at a maximum mean pressure of 22 tsi and penetration was seven out of ten shots must penetrate 27mm armour plate at 100 yards.The headstamp should include the code "WI" or "WIZ" and the primer annulus was green.The marking of 15mm BESA rounds however did not always strictly follow specification and early rounds, whatever the loading, were headstamped with maker and date and "15mmWZ". Also some armour piercing rounds will be found with a green tip.The W Mark I and Iz was declared obsolete in January 1945.Thewas approved in August 1941 and shown in LoC Paragraph B.5434 dated December 1941. The Design was DD/L/11121 (later DD/L/14011) and the bullet was boat tailed with a gilding metal envelope with a lead
Taking full advantage of the law of supply and demand, Coca-Cola Co. has quietly begun testing a vending machine that can automatically raise prices for its drinks in hot weather.  "This technology is something the Coca-Cola Co. has been looking at for more than a year," said Rob Baskin, a company spokesman, adding that it had not yet been placed in any consumer market.  But the potential was heralded by the company's chairman and chief executive in an interview this month with a Brazilian newsmagazine.  Chairman M. Douglas Ivester described how desire for a cold drink can increase during a sports championship final held in the summer heat. "So it is fair that it should be more expensive," Ivester was quoted as saying in the magazine, Veja. "The machine will simply make this process automatic."  The process appears to be done simply through a temperature sensor and a computer chip, not any breakthrough technology, though Coca-Cola refused to provide details Wednesday.  While the concept might seem unfair to a thirsty person, it essentially extends to another industry what has become the practice for airlines and other companies that sell products and services to consumers. The falling price of computer chips and the increasing ease of connecting to the Internet has made it practical for companies to pair daily and hourly fluctuations in demand with fluctuations in price--even if the product is a can of soda that sells for just 75 cents.  The potential for other types of innovations is great. Other modifications under discussion at Coca-Cola, Baskin said, include adjusting prices based on demand at a specific machine. "What could you do to boost sales at off-hours?" he asked. "You might be able to lower the price. It might be discounted at a vending machine in a building during the evening or when there's less traffic."  Vending machines have become an increasingly important source of profits for Coca-Cola and its archrival, Pepsico. Over the last three years, earnings of the soft-drink giants have eroded as they waged a price war in supermarkets. Vending machines have remained largely untouched by the discounting. Now, Coca-Cola aims to tweak what has been a golden goose to extract even more profits.  "There are a number of initiatives under way in Japan, the United States and in other parts of the world where the technology in vending is rapidly improving, not only from a temperature-scanning capability but also to understand when a machine is out of stock," said Andrew Conway, a beverage analyst for Morgan Stanley. "The increase in the rate of technology breakthrough in vending is pretty dramatic."  Machines are already in place that can accept credit cards and debit cards for payment.  In Australia and North Carolina, Coke bottlers use machines to relay, via wireless signal or telephone, information about which drinks are selling and at what rates in a particular location.  The technology is known as intelligent vending, Baskin said, and the information gathered and relayed by Internet helps salespeople to figure out which drinks will sell best in which locations.  In Japan, some vending machines already adjust their prices based on the temperature outside, using wireless modems, said Gad Elmoznino, director of the Trisignal division of Eicon Technology, a Montreal-based modem maker. "They are going to be using more and more communications in these machines to do interactive price setting," he said.  Industry reactions to the heat-sensitive Coke machine ranged from enthusiastic to sanctimonious. "It's another reason to move to Sweden," one beverage industry executive sniffed. "What's next? A machine that X-rays people's pockets to find out how much change they have and raises the price accordingly?"
**Wall of text ahead! Due to the complexity of Physx and the amount of research I have spent trying to fix this issue, This is going to be a very long post. To Skip to how you can help, find the line that starts with "Instructions", Otherwise, sip some coffee , read on and maybe get a better understanding of Physx** -------- **Introduction** Hey reddit, I understand not everyone here has Borderlands 2/TPS but something needs to be done about the performance of PhysX in Borderlands 2/TPS and that's what my goal is. I have spent the last 4 weeks doing a ton of research into the way Physx works and the CPU/GPU utilization aspect. Ideally I would like to hire someone to work on the Physx aspect of the game since i am not proficient in coding, and in the meantime, I am learning how to do this myself. Specifically, I want someone to decode and edit the .dll and the .bin files in the game directory and change any calls or strings and maybe some float lines to make fluid and particle effects work better on multi threaded hardware. The end goal is for me and everyone else to finally have a fix for the low fps when Physx is being utilised. I will be updating this thread as I come across more info. I believe some of the .dll and .bin files in the game directory hold the code that is overriding any important INI tweaks that are made. I want to change the lifetime of particles AND SPH fluid effects since no physx ini tweaks work besides "MaxParticleResize". Eventually If I come up with a tweak that fixes Physx for me, I will release it to everyone else so our FPS can stop being held down. **Background** Back in 2013, I had a GTX 680 classified and a I7 920 @ 4.4GHz. I was able to run Borderlands 2 with no problem 60 + fps on the highest settings while on 1920 X 1080. Fast forward to now, I have a GTX 1080 Classified oc'd with a I7 5930k oc'd to 4.6ghz and I am unable to maintain that same 60fps @1920 x 1080 with better hardware while fluid and particle effects are being used. It's most evident in, but jot limited to Bloodshot Stronghold when I am using my DP Unkempt Harold(DPUH) and fighting enemies with fluid effects around while the DPUH is kicking up solid particles. My FPS is 120 when there is no liquid or particles. I have used a lot of ini tweaks but none of the important ones work besides maxparticleresize but that does not affect the lifetime of the particles or the fluid effects. I find it unacceptable to lower or disable Physx as IMO it adds a lot to the game in terms of things like oh...you know...fun. I'm seeing posts all over the Web on how people with triple sli 980s, and dual titan setups are having the same problem. Neither Gearbox or Nvidia are working on fixing this issue so I feel it's time to do something about this and I am going to try my best to get physx working as it should because this is my favorite game. If this works for Borderlands 2, I will try to optimize The Pre-Sequel as well. I want to get an idea of what the physx indicator is telling people when they are in game standing still and then while heavy particle and fluid effects are being used. Just from some google searches, Some people have been reporting that the Physx visual indicator is reporting GPU and some saying CPU. Mine, for instance does not show Physx - GPU even though I have mine set to use my GTX 1080 Classified. Also, a lot of people who are using monitoring software are reporting very low CPU/GPU usage even when physx effects are intense. Back during release, Nvidia and Gearbox boasted that the Physx runs great on Borderlands 2 and that we wouldnt have the issues we at undressed having now. It's not like it's a month after release. The game came out 5 years ago. I think it's safe to say we won't be getting help from anyone at Nvidia or gearbox. [Here](http://physxinfo.com/news/9425/borderlands-2-is-cpu-capable-of-handling-the-physx-effects/) is a very interesting article about physx in Borderlands 2. It's from PhysxInfo.com and apparently the person (Zogrim) who made the article spoke to the devs that worked on Physx and this is what he had to say. "First thing I did after the release – I have asked the PhysX content team, who has worked with Borderlands, if game using APEX – it is not. Just default PhysX Cloth and PhysX Particle System implementations. So those settings have no use" **Instructions** This is the part where YOU can help me figure
Description: Two-way, stand-mounted loudspeaker. Drive units: ¾" (19mm) ferrofluid-cooled, soft-dome tweeter, 6.5" (170mm) long-throw paper-cone woofer. Crossover frequency: 3.5kHz. Frequency response: 68Hz–20kHz, ±3dB. Sensitivity: 88.5dB/W/m. Nominal impedance: 8 ohms. Recommended power: 5–40W.  Dimension: 13.5" (343mm) H x 8.25" (210mm) W x 7.75" (197mm). Weight: 9 lbs each (4.1 kg).  Finish: Wood grain vinyl.  Price: $150/pair (1984); no longer available (2013).  Manufacturer: Boston Acoustics, 7 Constitution Way, Woburn, MA 01801. Tel: (201) 762-6429, (508) 538-5000. Web: www.bostonacoustics.com/US/Pages/Home.aspx.
The fact that so many books still name the Beatles as "the greatest or most significant or most influential" rock band ever only tells you how far rock music still is from becoming a serious art. Jazz critics have long recognized that the greatest jazz musicians of all times are Duke Ellington and John Coltrane, who were not the most famous or richest or best sellers of their times, let alone of all times. Classical critics rank the highly controversial Beethoven over classical musicians who were highly popular in courts around Europe. Rock critics are still blinded by commercial success. The Beatles sold more than anyone else (not true, by the way), therefore they must have been the greatest. Jazz critics grow up listening to a lot of jazz music of the past, classical critics grow up listening to a lot of classical music of the past. Rock critics are often totally ignorant of the rock music of the past, they barely know the best sellers. No wonder they will think that the Beatles did anything worthy of being saved. In a sense, the Beatles are emblematic of the status of rock criticism as a whole: too much attention paid to commercial phenomena (be it grunge or U2) and too little to the merits of real musicians. If somebody composes the most divine music but no major label picks him up and sells him around the world, a lot of rock critics will ignore him. If a major label picks up a musician who is as stereotyped as can be but launches her or him worldwide, your average critic will waste rivers of ink on her or him. This is the sad status of rock criticism: rock critics are basically publicists working for major labels, distributors and record stores. They simply highlight what product the music business wants to make money from. Hopefully, one not-too-distant day, there will be a clear demarcation between a great musician like Tim Buckley, who never sold much, and commercial products like the Beatles. At such a time, rock critics will study their rock history and understand which artists accomplished which musical feat, and which simply exploited it commercially. Beatles' "Aryan" music removed any trace of black music from rock and roll. It replaced syncopated African rhythm with linear Western melody, and lusty negro attitudes with cute white-kid smiles. Contemporary musicians never spoke highly of the Beatles, and for good reason. They could never figure out why the Beatles' songs should be regarded more highly than their own. They knew that the Beatles were simply lucky to become a folk phenomenon (thanks to "Beatlemania", which had nothing to do with their musical merits). That phenomenon kept alive interest in their (mediocre) musical endeavours to this day. Nothing else grants the Beatles more attention than, say, the Kinks or the Rolling Stones. There was nothing intrinsically better in the Beatles' music. Ray Davies of the Kinks was certainly a far better songwriter than Lennon & McCartney. The Stones were certainly much more skilled musicians than the 'Fab Four'. And Pete Townshend was a far more accomplished composer, capable of entire operas such as "Tommy" and "Quadrophenia"; not to mention the far greater British musicians who followed them in subsequent decades or the US musicians themselves who initially spearheaded what the Beatles merely later repackaged to the masses. The Beatles sold a lot of records not because they were the greatest musicians but simply because their music was easy to sell to the masses: it had no difficult content, it had no technical innovations, it had no creative depth. They wrote a bunch of catchy 3-minute ditties and they were photogenic. If somebody had not invented "Beatlemania" in 1963, you would not have wasted five minutes of your time reading these pages about such a trivial band. Extended note from 2010. The Beatles were not a terribly interesting band, but their fans were and still are an interesting phenomenon. I can only name religious fundamentalists as annoying (and as threatening) as Beatles fans, and as persevering in sabotaging anyone who dares express an alternate opinion of their faith. They have turned me into some kind of Internet celebrity not because of the 6,000 bios that i have written, not because of the 800-page book that i published, not because of the 30 years of cultural events that i organized, but simply because i downplayed the artistic merits of the Beatles, an action that they consider as disgraceful as the 2001 terrorist attacks. Jakub Krawczynski sent me this supportive comment in 2010: I find it quite amusing that almost all of the Beatles songs have their own entries on Wikipedia (nothing wrong with that in itself, actually), even if they are not singles, and each of them is meticulously dissected as if there were transcendental suites exceeding human comprehension, yet bands like Faust or Red Krayola, etc. have biographies even shorter than just one article about any random Beatles song. Needless to say, none of their songs have any articles on them, yet I'm sure there would be a lot more to
Cozy Cobblestone Cap I love browsing through knit stitch dictionaries for inspiration.  I recently came across the "Garter Stitch Cobblestones" stitch and loved it.  It had texture, yet was a simple pattern.  It was easy to visualize knit in a hat for both men and women.  And it was just different looking. So, I started planning a hat using this stitch.  I made more mistakes than usual on this one and ripped out plenty of stitches before I completed it, but I really like the look of it.  It is stretchy enough to fit most adults and it is made with a worsted weight yarn.  This hat will make a perfect chemo cap to wear to bed, in the warmer weather or just anytime a really heavy hat is not needed. There is an edge stitch on either side of this pattern that will make seaming the hat very easy without breaking up the pattern.  The pattern is working on a multiple of 12 plus two edge stitches, so if you would like to alter it for a different size, just keep that in mind. The pattern is free of course, although anyone who wishes to support Delaware Head Huggers with a monetary donation is welcome to do so, of course.  Our website, www.delawareheadhuggers.org has an easy donate button and all money is used to pay for shipping costs and tags for each hat.  I hope many of you will make one, or two or twenty and donate them to Delaware Head Huggers or your local cancer center!  If anyone has trouble printing this pattern, you can try the copy of Scribd: Cozy Cobblestone PDF .  If you highlight the text of the pattern and then paste it in a Word document, it works. Size 7 knitting needles Worsted weight yarn – I used stash yarn that did not have a label, so I honestly don't know how many yards I used.  Cast on 86 stitches. Knit garter stitch (knit every row) for 10 rows. Begin Garter Stitch Cobblestone pattern:                         Row 1 and every alternate (odd) row:  Knit all stitches.                         Rows 2, 10, 12, 14, 22 and 24:  Purl all stitches.                         Rows 4, 6 and 8:  K1, *P3, K6, P3*; repeat from * to * to last stitch.  K1.                         Rows 16, 18 and 20:  K1, *P6, K6*; repeat from * to * to last stitch.  K1.             Knit Rows 1 through 24. Repeat Rows 1 through 22.             Decrease Crown:                         Row 1:  K1, *K5, SSK*; repeat from * to * to last stitch.  K1.  (74 stitches)                         Row 2 and all even rows:  Purl all stitches. Row 3:  K1, *K4, SSK*; repeat from * to * to last stitch.  K1.  (62 stitches) Row 5:  K1, *K3, SSK*; repeat from * to * to last stitch.  K1.  (50 stitches) Row 7:  K1, *K2, SSK*; repeat from * to * to last stitch.  K1.  (38 stitches) Row 9:  K1, *K1, SSK*; repeat from * to * to last stitch.  K1.  (26 stitches) Row 11:  K1, SSK to last stitch, K1.  (14 stitches)             Cut working yarn leaving a long tail.  Draw yarn through live stitches left on your needle.  Cinch closed and sew the seam.  Weave in ends and enjoy!
The 12 nations listed in the preamble (below) signed the Antarctic Treaty on 1 December 1959 at Washington, D.C. The Treaty entered into force on 23 June 1961; the 12 signatories became the original 12 consultative nations.  As of April 2010, 17 additional nations (Brazil, Bulgaria, China, Czech Republic, Ecuador, Finland, Germany, India, Italy, Netherlands, Peru, Poland, Republic of Korea, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine, and Uruguay) have achieved consultative status by acceding to the Treaty and by conducting substantial scientific research in Antarctica. Russia carries forward the signatory privileges and responsibilities established by the former Soviet Union.  Another 21 nations have acceded to the Antarctic Treaty: Austria, Belarus, Canada, Colombia, Cuba, Democratic Peoples Republic of Korea, Denmark, Estonia, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Malaysia, Monaco, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Portugal, Romania, Slovak Republic, Switzerland, Turkey, and Venezuela. These nations agree to abide by the treaty and may attend consultative meetings as observers.  The 50 Antarctic Treaty nations represent about two-thirds of the world's human population.  Consultative meetings have been held approximately every other year since the treaty entered into force, but since 1993 they have been held more frequently. Each meeting has generated recommendations regarding operation of the treaty that, when ratified by the participating governments, become binding on the parties to the treaty.  Additional meetings within the Antarctic Treaty system have produced agreements on conservation of seals, conservation of living resources, and comprehensive environmental protection. For detailed information about the Treaty System, please visit the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat web site at http://www.ats.aq/.  What follows is the complete text of the Antarctic Treaty. The headings for each article were added by the National Science Foundation and are unofficial.  [preamble]  The Governments of Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Chile, the French Republic, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, the Union of South Africa, The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the United States of America,  Recognizing that it is in the interest of all mankind that Antarctica shall continue forever to be used exclusively for peaceful purposes and shall not become the scene or object of international discord;  Acknowledging the substantial contributions to scientific knowledge resulting from international cooperation in scientific investigation in Antarctica;  Convinced that the establishment of a firm foundation for the continuation and development of such cooperation on the basis of freedom of scientific investigation in Antarctica as applied during the International Geophysical Year accords with the interests of science and the progress of all mankind;  Convinced also that a treaty ensuring the use of Antarctica for peaceful purposes only and the continuance of international harmony in Antarctica will further the purposes and principles embodied in the Charter of the United Nations;  Have agreed as follows:  Article I  [Antarctica for peaceful purposes only]  1. Antarctica shall be used for peaceful purposes only. There shall be prohibited, inter alia, any measures of a military nature, such as the establishment of military bases and fortifications, the carrying out of military maneuvers, as well as the testing of any type of weapons.  2. The present Treaty shall not prevent the use of military personnel or equipment for scientific research or for any other peaceful purposes.  Article II  [freedom of scientific investigation to continue]  Freedom of scientific investigation in Antarctica and cooperation toward that end, as applied during the International Geophysical Year, shall continue, subject to the provisions of the present Treaty.  Article III  [plans and results to be exchanged]  1. In order to promote international cooperation in scientific investigation in Antarctica, as provided for in Article II of the present Treaty, the Contracting Parties agree that, to the greatest extent feasible and practicable:  (a) information regarding plans for scientific programs in Antarctica shall be exchanged to permit maximum economy and efficiency of operations;  (b) scientific personnel shall be exchanged in Antarctica between expeditions and stations;  (c) scientific observations and results from Antarctica shall be exchanged and made freely available.  2. In implementing this Article, every encouragement shall be given to the establishment of cooperative working relations with those Specialized Agencies of the United Nations and other international organizations having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctica.  Article IV  [territorial claims]  1. Nothing contained in the present Treaty shall be interpreted as:  (a) a renunciation by any Contracting Party of previously asserted rights of or claims to territorial sovereignty in Antarctica;  (b) a renunciation or diminution by any Contracting Party of any basis of claim to territorial sovereignty in Antarctica which it may have whether as a result of its activities or those of its nationals in Antarctica, or otherwise;  (c) prejudicing the position of any Contracting Party as
Theresa May gathered her cabinet together for a brainstorming session at Chequers yesterday. About time. Two months on from the EU referendum, and while we all know that "Brexit means Brexit", we're still none the wiser about what "Brexit" itself means.  International Trade Secretary Liam Fox seems to think it means he should take over large parts of the Foreign Office, and anything to do with trade and Europe. Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson is equally certain it does not. Nemo me impune lacessit, as the self-styled classics scholar might put it – don't mess with me.  Brexit Secretary David Davis says it is "ten times more difficult than the Schleswig Holstein Question". If so, answers may not be forthcoming for some time. Lord Palmerston said of Schleswig-Holstein in the 19th Century: "Only three people have ever really understood it: the Prince Consort, who is dead, a German professor, who has gone mad, and I who have forgotten all about it." There are now three UK cabinet ministers in charge of Brexit and they may be going the same way.  We've heard practically nothing from the voluble former Mayor of London except those cryptic remarks in Brussels in July about Brexit not meaning Britain leaves Europe "in any sense". We've heard a lot about musical chairs in Whitehall as ministers bicker about who should get the biggest offices and the most civil servants. But there have been no significant policy statements from any of the lead ministers on the most important constitutional and diplomatic issue facing Britain since we joined the EU in 1973.  As for the Prime Minister, saying she is all over the place would be an insult to people lacking a sense of direction. We were initially led to believe she was going to bulldoze Brexit using her powers under Royal Prerogative. "Like a Tudor monarch", as the Labour MP Barry Gardiner put it. This didn't go down too well with the opinion-forming classes because we are supposed to be a democracy. Referendums are advisory and MPs are meant to take these crucial decisions in our sovereign parliament.  But it would, of course, be an abomination for parliament to simply reject the referendum. MPs don't have the authority any more to ignore such a direct expression of the people's will. However, nor is it acceptable for them to have no say at all, as Mrs May initially implied. So that was changed, and her official spokesman has now said that, of course, MPs would "have a say" on Brexit. Which only raises further questions about what having a say would mean. Would they have a vote? Would that vote mean anything? Would the House of Lords be able to veto a Brexit motion? And can it be amended by either chamber of parliament?  What about the Scottish Parliament? Does it have a say too? The PM has suggested it would. After her Bute House meeting with Nicola Sturgeon in June she said she wouldn't begin the Article 50 negotiations on leaving the EU until there was an "agreed UK approach". No one seriously believes this gives Ms Sturgeon a veto, but it did suggest there could be significant leverage.  But to have a deal, with sidebars and concessions, you have to have a negotiation, and until we know what is being negotiated, there can't be any meaningful talks about it. Which brings us back to yesterday's Chequers brainstorm. It would have been fascinating to be a fly on the wall, and no doubt the many flies around the table were taking mental notes. Forget the motor industry, the prospects for British publishing have never looked more rosy as ministers and civil servants plan their memoirs. Mr Johnson is probably onto his second draft.  Mrs May insisted we are definitely leaving the EU and there should be no loose talk of a second referendum, as advocated by Labour leadership challenger Owen Smith. This doesn't mean the Brexit process couldn't be stalled or that another general election couldn't intercede before negotiations are over or even begun. The PM says Article 50, won't be invoked until January 2017 at the earliest. She is likely to wait until the German and French elections are out of the way later in the year. This means negotiations with Brussels, which take a minimum of two years, may not be completed until the very eve of the 2020 general election, which could itself become a de facto referendum on the Brexit settlement.  If by some miracle, Labour is elected in 2020 on a Remain ticket, Britain could theoretically find itself negotiating re-entry to the EU even before we've actually left it. What would Brussels say about that? Probably: you'll have had your Brexit, live with it. The EU may anyway have assumed a rather different shape by then, with a deepening of financial and military integration, and a renewed determination to impose the single currency on all its members. It seems most unlikely Britain would vote to adopt the euro.  But we're getting ahead of ourselves. Loosely
Posted 11 March 2009 - 03:04 PM  The history of this Chile variety, a few years ago, in a small town to the south of the state of Yucatan near Uxmal, was found a plantation whit an impteresant characteristics, is practically immune to the affectations by virus, and the taste is wonderful, with an almost perfumed flavor very fruit taste.In my opinion taste much better than a caribbean red. perhaps the best Habanero flavor of all.
Former prime minister Baroness Thatcher dies peacefully in her suite at the Ritz after suffering a massive stroke at 87  The Iron Lady became Britain's first and only female Prime Minister  Baroness Thatcher had suffered from poor health over the past decade  Mrs Thatcher had been staying at the Ritz hotel up until her death  Politician will have a ceremonial funeral at St Paul's Cathedral next week   Last politician to be afforded that honour was Winston Churchill in 1965  David Cameron: 'We've lost a great leader and a great Briton'  Queen 'sad' and sends private message of sympathy to her family  President Barack Obama: 'She stands as an example to our daughters'  Family asks well-wishers for donations to Royal Hospital Chelsea  MPs to return from recess early to pay tribute to former PM in Commons   Passed away peacefully: Former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher died today after a massive stroke  Former Conservative prime minister Margaret Thatcher died in a suite at the Ritz today after suffering a severe stroke.   Britain's first and only female political leader passed away peacefully aged 87, after battling poor health for more than a decade.  After a minor operation over Christmas, Baroness Thatcher had spent the past few months recuperating at the five-star hotel in central London .   The Iron Lady was given 24-hour care by nursing staff in her suite, after becoming too frail to stay in her Belgravia home.   The grocer's daughter, who became the longest serving British prime minister of the 20th century, will be honoured with a full ceremonial funeral - one step below a state funeral - at St Paul's Cathedral next week.  Not since Winston Churchill's death has a politician been granted such a tribute. His funeral was also held there in 1965.  Her spokesman Lord Bell said: 'It is with great sadness that Mark and Carol Thatcher announced that their mother Baroness Thatcher died peacefully following a stroke this morning'.  Her daughter Carol dashed from her home in the Alps to London on Sunday morning to be by her mother's side before she died.   The Queen was sad to hear of Baroness Thatcher's death and Her Majesty will send a private message of sympathy to the family, Buckingham Palace said today.  Scroll down for video   Election elation: Mrs Thatcher waves from the steps of No 10 Downing Street with husband Denis after becoming Britain's first female Prime Minister in 1979  U.S. President Barack Obama said the 'world has lost one of the great champions of freedom and liberty, and America has lost a true friend'.   Speech: David Cameron returned to Britain from a trip to the Eurozone to pay tribute to Baroness Thatcher  'There were people who said she couldn¿t make it, who stood in her way, who said that a woman couldn¿t lead, and she defied them all,' the PM said Sadness: Messages left in a book of condolence for Baroness Thatcher at Grantham Museum in Lincolnshire Death: Former Prime minister Margaret Thatcher leaves Number 10 Downing Street for the last time after she was defeated by John Major in the Conservative Party leadership election of 1990 'She stands as an example to our daughters that there is no glass ceiling that can't be shattered'. When her funeral takes place, the streets between Westminster and St Paul's will be cleared for the procession, the date of which is yet to be decided. Her coffin will be processed through the streets before her ceremonial funeral, which will be broadcast live on television. Members of the armed services will line the route of Baroness Thatcher's funeral procession from the Palace of Westminster to St Paul's. The day before the funeral the coffin will be transferred to the Chapel of St Mary Undercroft in the Palace of Westminster. There will be a short service following its arrival before the coffin rests in the chapel overnight.  Portrait: Flowers and pictures were left at her home in tribute to the 'Iron Lady', who transformed Britain during her 11 years in power  Paying tribute: A well-wisher places flowers at the door of former at Margaret Thatcher's home in central London A Downing Street statement said: 'On the day itself, the streets will be cleared of traffic and the coffin will travel by hearse from the Chapel of St Mary Undercroft in the Palace of Westminster to the Church of St Clement Danes, the RAF Chapel, on the Strand. The route from the Church of St Clement Danes will be lined by personnel from the RAF, Navy and Army before it is met at St Paul's by a guard of honour. Members of the armed services and pensioners of the Royal Hospital Chelsea will line the steps of St Paul's. 'At the church the coffin will be transferred to a gun carriage drawn by the King's Troop Royal Artillery. The coffin will then be borne in procession from St Clement Danes to St Paul's Cathedral. The route will be lined
It only takes a quick scan of the public safety section of area newspapers to see what alcohol can do to people, and a state legislator is suggesting — again — that one answer to the problem is to allow more people to drink at a younger age.  Rep. Phyllis Kahn, the Minneapolis DFLer, is no stranger to filing bills that are dead on arrival at the Capitol, and this year's bill probably isn't going to go anywhere. But the issue probably isn't going to go away, either.  "It's a very good way to deal with the serious problem of binge drinking, particularly on college campuses," Kahn tells the Pioneer Press.  She says the idea is to allow young people to learn how to drink socially.  Kahn's bill doesn't allow 18 year olds to buy at a liquor store, but Sen. Branden Petersen, R-Andover, said he plans to introduce legislation to lower the drinking age for both bars and liquor stores, on the theory that 18 is the age of legal adulthood for everything else.  We tried this once before, during the Vietnam War. We used the same rationale that appears again in the Pioneer Press story.  "If you can go and die for your country but you can't have a beer, I can't understand that," said Andrew Deziel, 18, of Bloomington, Minn.  As I recall the early '70s, those of us who made that point were doing everything we could to keep from being drafted.  But there is some evidence that a lower drinking age has some impact on the drinking problem.  "In general, the younger people start to drink the safer they are," said Brown University anthropology professor Dwight Heath, the go-to expert on the matter, it appears. "Alcohol has no mystique. It's no big deal. By contrast, where it's banned until age 21, there's something of the 'forbidden fruit' syndrome."  In an editorial this week, the University of Virginia Cavalier Daily says with a lower drinking age, college kids with a drinking problem might be more likely to seek help.  It also makes another true point — kids are going to drink anyway.  If restricting the legal drinking age to 21 doesn't successfully address the problem of drunk driving, the value of such a law seems minimal. The law effectively punishes under-21-year-olds who don't drive drunk or even drive at all, and there is no reason to believe those who would drive drunk at 18 wouldn't do so at 21. Especially since 18-year-olds are given all the markers of adulthood — the right to vote and legal adulthood in court, among others — refusing them the authority to drink is at the very least inconsistent. Thus, this law is ineffective at best. But its negative consequences make it an obvious area of concern for colleges and universities, on whose campuses this issue can even be a safety and legal concern.  Even if Rep. Kahn's bill passes the Legislature — it won't — Gov. Dayton says he thinks the current drinking age is fine where it is.  Related: Minimum Legal Drinking Ages around the World.
From W3C Wiki  <input type="password">  The password state represents a one line plain text edit control for the element's value.  HTML Attributes  autocomplete = on/ off/ default on  The on state indicates that the value is not particularly sensitive and the user can expect to be able to rely on his user agent to remember values he has entered for that control. off  The off state indicates either that the control's input data is particularly sensitive (for example the activation code for a nuclear weapon); or that it is a value that will never be reused (for example a one-time-key for a bank login) and the user will therefore have to explicitly enter the data each time, instead of being able to rely on the UA to prefill the value for him; or that the document provides its own autocomplete mechanism and does not want the user agent to provide autocompletion values. default  The default state indicates that the user agent is to use the autocomplete attribute on the element's form owner instead. (By default, the autocomplete attribute of form elements is in the on state.)  = on/ off/ default   maxlength = positive integer  Gives the maximum allowed value length of the element.   name = string  Gives the name of the input element.   pattern =  Specifies a regular expression against which the control's value is to be checked.  If specified, the attribute's value must match the JavaScript Pattern production.  When an input element has a pattern attribute specified, authors should include a title attribute to give a description of the pattern.   placeholder = string  Represents a short hint (a word or short phrase) intended to aid the user with data entry.  A hint could be a sample value or a brief description of the expected format. For a longer hint or other advisory text, the title attribute is more appropriate.   readonly = boolean  Controls whether or not the user can edit the form control.   required = boolean  When specified, the element is required.   size = valid non-negative integer  The number of options meant to be shown by the control represented by its element.   value = string  Gives the default value of the input element.  Examples  Example A  [try it]:  <label>PW: <input type="password"></label>  HTML Reference  The HTML5 specification defines the Password state in 4.10.7.1.6 PASSWORD STATE.
IRONTOWN BLUES blues  Penguin House has just informed me of a new publication date for Irontown Blues. It is now scheduled to appear in August 28, 2018. Fifteen months away. I'm very sorry to have to tell you all this, but there is absolutely nothing I can do about it.  Vancouver, WA  May 31, 2017
An Apple without Steve Jobs? Larry Ellison dismissed the idea with a wave of his hand. On Tuesday's episode of CBS This Morning, Charlie Rose asks the Oracle CEO how he thought the computer company would fare without his friend Steve Jobs, and his answer was that history will repeat itself again. "Well, we already know," Ellison told Rose. "We conducted the experiment. It's been done," he continued.  "We saw Apple with Steve Jobs," said Ellison, raising a finger of a single hand to the sky in a meaningful gesture. "We saw Apple without Steve Jobs." Down came the finger again. "We saw Apple with Steve Jobs." Up went the finger as Ellison alluded to the roller coaster history of success and struggle that Apple saw over the past three decades.  "And now, we're going to see Apple without Steve Jobs," he ended, making it clear that he believes the fortunes of Apple are not long for this world without the company's mentor at hand. Ellison hasn't shied away from making bold predictions in the past: in 1993 he declared that Microsoft was the "present" and Oracle would be the "future" of computing.  Apple's stock price has been in flux for the past year or so as investors have been anxious for the company to release new, innovative devices as it had done in the past. Compared to a year ago, the price of Apple's stock is well below the highs it had been experiencing. But the impending release of a new iPhone, along with an expected lower cost model, will likely bump Apple's stock for at least a little while. Current CEO Tim Cook has alluded to wearable technology, such as smartwatches, as being a "profound opportunity" for Apple. Though the company hasn't released any wearables yet, they may be the next area for Apple to innovate in.  For all of the hay that has been made about Apple not succeeding without Steve Jobs, the company has been able to post massive revenues and profits quarter after quarter. Whether it has enough in the tank to keep going at that pace remains to be seen, but it will likely be some time before Apple completely falls apart — assuming it does at all.
I'M A BIIIIIIIIRD!  This is a video about a 'salmon cannon' designed to launch salmon upstream in places where dams make swimming upstream to spawn impossible. The cannon can shoot the fish up to 22MPH, with a rate of 40 salmon per minute. Then they all get together and have a giant orgy before dying. Getting shot out of a cannon, boning, then dying? I could only be so lucky.  Keep going for the video news report.  Thanks to Pasty, who agrees big cities should use human cannons instead of buses and subways.
Peterborough chairman Darragh MacAnthony says his club "struck when the iron was hot" when selling Conor Washington and that QPR paid too much for him.  Posh, then managed by Graham Westley, sold Washington to Rangers in January last year.  "He had a great run of form and Graham Westley deserves credit for improving him, but I couldn't see him keeping it up," MacAnthony told the Peterborough Telegraph.  "Conor is a great lad, but he wasn't worth £3m. It was a great deal for us as there was so much going on at the club at the time he wasn't going to get us up.  "We struck when the iron was hot with Conor. He almost picked up a serious knee injury seven days before we sold him."
I called Ada Palmer's debut Too Like The Lightning "devastatingly accomplished… an arch and playful narrative," when I reviewed it last summer. Too Like The Lightning was one part of a whole, the first half of a narrative that I expected Seven Surrenders would complete—and back then I said I couldn't imagine that Palmer would "fail to stick the dismount."  I may have been a trifle optimistic, for while Too Like The Lightning is a glittering baroque entry into the ranks of science fiction's political thrillers, it saves its debut-novel flaws for the second part of the narrative. Seven Surrenders isn't a poor continuation (or a conclusion: I'm given to understand that the Terra Ignota books will be four in number, with each two forming separate arcs) by any stretch of the imagination. But the span of months that separates the two volumes left me quite a lot of time to reflect on Too Like The Lightning. Time to lose the initial white heat of intoxication at Too Like The Lightning's self-consciously archaising tone, its arch wryness, its playful blasphemy and neo-Enlightenment concerns. Too Like The Lightning dazzled with possibility: now Seven Surrenders has to turn all that shine into substance, and that?  That's a tall order.  With Mycroft Canner's Enlightenment-esque voice and their happily changeable approach to gendered pronouns no longer possessed of enchanting novelty, Seven Surrenders faces the challenge of turning the political and personal intrigues of Too Like The Lightning, its theologies and miracles and thematic concern with conflict in the post-scarcity age, into a coherent whole. But it turns out that it's quite difficult to forge a climax and conclusion that satisfies the appetite when my expectations were raised pretty high: Seven Surrenders' major problem is that there's just too much going on across these two books for it to wrap up enough strands with enough attention paid to each that the reader feels that they've paid off.  It becomes clear in Seven Surrenders that Palmer's series is building towards war, a war that further books may, perhaps, deal with—or whose consequences they may deal with—in more detail. (Some of the statements Palmer's characters make about war strike me as factually dubious—for example, claiming an absence of major non-colonial wars for a generation before the start of WWI ignores the Ottoman-Russian, Greco-Turkish, and Balkan conflicts between 1877 and 1914, which developed, if the major powers were looking, new tactics for warfare with modern weapons; while asserting technological change and lack of knowledgeable veterans as the primary causes of the high casualty rate of the Great War is definitely arguable.) But the clever card-pyramid of intrigue and secrets and betrayals and lies and plausible deniability that Palmer set up in Too Like The Lightning on the way to this end doesn't come together cleanly, or with a minimum of confusion in Seven Surrenders. However realistic and true-to-life this confusing trail of conflicting agendas might be, the difference between real life and fiction is that fiction, ultimately, needs to make sense. And in a novel where the world's biggest movers and shakers are all part of the same faintly sordid sex club, I feel that the gap between the global and the personal needs to collapse a little more smoothly and with fewer hastily-wrapped dangling strands.  The political manoeuvrings, grand and personal, sit awkwardly alongside the peculiar immanent theology of Palmer's novels. In Too Like The Lightning, the truth of Mycroft's theological claims—the divinity of J.E.D.D. Mason, the miraculous powers of the child Bridger—rested in a state much like Schrödinger's Cat, thanks to Mycroft's unreliable nature as a narrator. But Seven Surrenders removes this fertile uncertainty, and give us narrative confirmation of the presence of divinity alongside the mundane.  This doesn't make Seven Surrenders a bad book, mind you: taken together, Too Like The Lightning and Seven Surrenders make one extremely promising debut novel, but one where the promise of the first half is let down by the execution of the second. Seven Surrenders remains playfully baroque, vividly characterised, and possessed of a lively sense of humour, as well as a lively and argumentative interest in future societies and the problems of utopia. It's just not the tour-de-force second book I was hoping for.  Seven Surrenders is available now from Tor Books.  Read an excerpt from the novel here on Tor.com.  Liz Bourke is a cranky queer person who reads books. She holds a Ph.D in Classics from Trinity College, Dublin. Find her at her blog. Or her Twitter. She supports the work of the Irish Refugee Council and the Abortion Rights Campaign.
WHERE ARE THEY NOW: ALUMINI SPOTLIGHT Kelvin Bailey CLASS OF MARCH 2015 POISSONIER LINE COOK AT PIER W Kelvin Bailey at the EDWINS kitchen with his infectious smile!  Kelvin was part of the third class at EDWINS, which to most of us here seems like ages ago. However he left a lasting impression on what we do here at EDWINS. For anyone who has watched the 100 second chances video he features prominently in it and has continued to come back to EDWINS to speak to students here about what he's seen and done since he graduated. We sat down to talk to Kelvin recently about what he's been doing over the past year since he graduated in January. When he initially graduated Kelvin did an apprenticeship with Red/Moxie in Beachwood. He had a chance to do a lot of different things and as he puts it, the experience gave him "a different view of how restaurants work" when he compared it to EDWINS. Unfortunately Moxie didn't have any positions open so he went on to work at Corky and Lenny's, where he had a chance to experience volume like he had never seen. "I can't believe how fast it was, some days when I left I felt like I had corned beef everywhere" he says with a laugh. During this time he also continued to give back to EDWINS, "Kelvin's Rule" as some of the staff call it was created in honor of him when he brought everyone at the restaurant 10 pounds of corned beef and all the fixings for Ruben sandwiches, though he has never done this since, some of us still hold out hope.  George Simpson CLASS OF MARCH 2015 LINE COOK AND GARDE MANGER AT OLIVE GARDEN Pictured left to right: George Simpson, Andrew Kisner, Clarence Graves  After about six months at Corky and Lenny's he had the chance to move on when he found out Pier W was hiring, he applied and was quickly hired on as a line cook. Since then he has had a chance to see touch and feel "the best, and freshest fish" he has ever seen. Talking to him he tells us stories about how he's had a chance to meet and talk to the fishermen who catch the fish and send it to the restaurant daily. Funnily enough though his favorite dish to cook….twice baked potatoes, he says with a smile on his face. And that perfectly describes Kelvin, he's always smiling, always having a good time and always working hard whether at Pier W, or when he comes back to EDWINS just to say hello, and dice a few onions. George Simpson first began on his culinary journey long before he started at EDWINS in August of 2014. George knew that he had a passion for gastronomy when he was a small child. He would assist his mother with her catering company and remembers helping her bake large wedding cakes, which cultivated his enthusiasm for the culinary arts early on. His very first job was as a cook at KFC, and he built onto that experience with many different jobs and positions in the restaurant scene. George came to EDWINS to increase his learning potential, solidify his skills to become more marketable, and to network. His most memorable experience at EDWINS was when George and two of his fellow classmates traveled to Cincinnati and competed in an American Culinary Federation cooking competition with students from around the country. He placed third in the Solo Cooking Competition when he served his version of airline chicken and mashed potatoes with gravy and zucchini. After a successful apprenticeship at Olive Garden, George, along with 24 of his fellow students, successfully graduated from EDWINS on March 15, 2015. This was an important life event for George because it gave him a sense of achievement and accomplishment that he was able to share with his friends and family. After graduating, George took a position as a line cook at Olive Garden. He has additionally taken another job at Paco's Tacos and still pursues his independent photography business on the side. George would like to thank the EDWIN'S staff for their continued support and for making so many resources available to him after graduation. He is forever grateful for the opportunity and the job skills that he learned. He says that his education has helped him to have a better sense of self-worth. He has learned valuable coping strategies and a work ethic that is unsurpassed by most. George states that anyone who puts the time and hard work into the program can find success using the skills that he has learned. George views his completion of the EDWINS program as a stepping stone to furthering his culinary career. He plans to continue his education with small business management classes because he eventually would like to purchase several hot dog carts and start a family-run business of hot dog vendors. We look forward to hearing about George's future business plans and getting to eat some of his
The 49ers had no false starts inside the noisy Superdome, and coach Jim Harbaugh ironically said that "speaks volumes" for center Marcus Martin's second career start.  Martin said neither he nor any linemen wore earplugs to combat the noise, adding: "It was a fun environment to play in."  Harbaugh was pleased with how well Martin bounced back from what appeared to be a difficult first start against the St. Louis Rams, a 13-10 defeat.  "Thought he did a tremendous job," Harbaugh said. "That's a tough environment to play in. They've won a lot of games consecutively down there because they have a great football team and a tremendous organization and also that's a difficult place to go down and get a win.  And then a center starting his second game in that kind of environment, I think that speaks volumes."  Helping Martin nail the silent snap count was right guard Alex Boone, who would tap Martin's right side to relay Colin Kaepernick's signal to snap the ball.  Martin is one of several rookies contributing this season, a class that includes nickel back Jimmie Ward, running back Carlos Hyde, linebacker Chris Borland, wide receiver/return specialist Bruce Ellington, cornerback Dontae Johnson and outside linebacker Aaron Lynch.  "You always pick players, sign players and understand that they have the license and the ability to do anything. Anything can happen," Harbaugh said of the rookie class. "Really pleased that these guys are playing well and acquitting themselves well. You prove to yourself. It's a jump from college to pro football.  "It's a jump from junior high football to high school. It's a jump from high school to college football. When you're in that first year doing everything for the first time, you wonder, even the best players are wondering, 'Can I do this? Can I do this at the level that I think I can and want to have.' And these guys have proven that they belong and they're quality football players. Very excited about it."
Product Description  Staples full strip stapler utilizes durable design technology for easy, efficient stapling  This Staples full strip stapler is perfect for heavy-duty projects such as stapling together long reports. The durable metal construction makes it capable of handling up to 30 sheets of paper at one time. Its soft, rubber grip, plastic handle and non-skid base allow for smooth usage and minimal jamming. The stapler features a push button for easy, efficient staple loading and unloading. It uses standard size staples and features One Touch technology that reduces the effort necessary to staple a document by up to 60 percent over traditional staplers.  Desktop stapler  Staples up to 30 sheets of 20 lb. paper  60% less effort than traditional desktop staplers  Durable metal construction with plastic base and handle  Full strip  Staple clinches flat for neat document stacking  Push button for easy staple loading  Soft, rubber grip and nonskid base  Black  Staples Brand 100% Satisfaction Guaranteed  Staple large documents with minimal effort using this Staples full-strip stapler. One-Touch Plus technology allows you to make professional-looking documents with less effort, so you get jobs done more quickly.   Easy to Use  Staples' exclusive One-Touch Plus technology makes completing large jobs simple. This 30-sheet-capacity stapler uses the power of leverage to staple documents with 60 percent less effort than traditional staplers. Its soft rubber grip also enhances comfort. Loading this stapler is also simple since pushing a single button opens up the chamber. It uses standard staples, making it easy to find replacements. It also resists jamming and has a nonskid base, so you'll be able to complete large jobs without interruptions.   Makes Professional Documents  This flat-stack stapler holds documents together as it staples through up to 30 sheets, so documents stack neatly and have a professional appearance. Its simplicity of use allows you to easily staple through all the pages on your first try so there won't be marks from failed attempts.   Durable Construction  This full-strip stapler is constructed of sturdy plastic with a metal mechanism designed to handle heavy daily use over long periods of time. Staples backs its product with a 100 percent satisfaction guarantee, giving you the quality assurance you need when it comes to your office tools.
Seattle firefighters are speaking out against a budget proposal that would end clean-ups of unauthorized homeless camps in the city.  In a letter to councilmember Kshama Sawant, Seattle Firefighters Union President Kenny Stuart said, "Needle sticks, exposure to biohazard and contaminants, and assault are serious issues that our firefighters face at unauthorized encampments every day."  And Stuart says the "proposal to restrict the City from appropriately addressing unauthorized encampments on public land creates a substantial hazard for firefighters and, in our opinion, would lead to greater medical and fire emergencies for our most vulnerable residents."  Sawant has included a proviso in the 2018 city budget that would put a halt to camp clean-ups until the city can guarantee the "human rights of unauthorized encampment inhabitants."  So far, there appears to be no serious challenge to Sawant's proviso.  Seattle launched its navigation team in July, which includes social workers and police officers that work to remove unauthorized camps and give residents safe alternative housing and access to mental health services.  Since August, the navigation team has intervened with 23 unauthorized camps in the city.  Copyright 2017 KING
At the moment no, since authors have very little control over changing the pricing (takes days/weeks sometimes) it's very hard for us to do any quick one-day sales.If it's any comfort, when you purchases Bolt we give you access to our github repository (email support@boltengine.com with your receipt + github username), so you will never have to rely on us pushing out updates as you can pull them whenever you want, between versions, etc.
Mavericks are bound for a top-5 pick next year barring some miraculous turnaround (Dirk dipping himself into the fountain of youth and averaging 30 ppg YASS) and Porter Jr. is on that short list of players. The only issue now is, he's missed four games and has now had surgery.  I've watched what I could find from his first (and possibly last) two minutes of collegiate basketball. It didn't look like he did anything that could have hurt his back. He came in, grabbed a rebound, and scored before asking to come out of the game. As he was sitting on the bench, he was rubbing on his left upper leg. He also wouldn't sit on his left butt cheek, keeping it unweighted. I tried to back track and see if I could find anything preceding the first game, but came up with nothing. Not more than four weeks ago, this kid was winning the dunk contest at Mizzou Madness. The next four weeks, a mystery.  So now that he's proceeded to go under the knife, here's a look into what it entails and what his recover will look like.  Porter Jr. had a microdiscectomy of the L3-L4 disc. A microdiscectomy is where the surgeon goes into the spine and removes part of the disc that has been herniated.Removal of that should immediately, or nearly immediately help with his symptoms. L3-L4 indicates which level of the spine is affected. When that nerve root is impacted, there is usually pain and/or sensation loss to the area of your inner thigh. It makes sense that he was rubbing that area after checking himself out of the game.  As a physical therapist, I won't go into the details of what exactly goes on during surgery. However, I will go through what his rehab would look like. Traditionally, people who have this surgery have a four to six week period where they're restricted with bending, rotation (twisting), and lifting. The disc itself usually takes about three to four months to heal. Return to play after that depends on Porter Jr.'s tolerance to his workouts.  So the big question is, would taking Michael Porter Jr. in the top five be a risk? Minhas et al wrote an article in Sports Health Magazine that examined disc herniations and their outcomes in the NBA. It gets into differences between players who had surgery versus those who didn't, compares their PER, and looks at a lot of other variables. The research showed that PER decreased the first season post-op, but after that, PER was comparable to the control group. It also showed that career wise, the post-op patients didn't have a significantly different average career length to the control group (4.26 to 5.68 years respectively).  The bigger question than, is the durability and longevity. Another study done by Hsu et al showed that elite athletes returning from a discectomy played for an average of 3.3 years. Granted, some of these athletes may have retired due to age as well. Porter Jr. is young, so he's got an advantage. I think he will recover and play, but I'll always have a little bit of precaution that will stick in the back of my head.  He'll still be worth a pick, though he might shuffle down your top-5 list. I was just looking forward to watching him this year in the NCAA.  Advertisements
The world state customiser for Dragon Age: Inquisition will be available for everyone to try out in just under two weeks.  The Dragon Age: Inquisition devs, Bioware, have hosted another livestream which revealed the start of the Dragon Age Keep open beta is on 29th October.  So, what is Dragon Age Keep. Well, it's basically a website that'll allow you to mould your Dragon Age story using the story decisions from the previous two games; Dragon Age: Origins, and Dragon Age II.  In the Keep you'll be able to customise hero stats and companion details, along with the results of quests from the first two games in order to save and import the world state you've created into Dragon Age Inquisition when it launches. It essentially helps you craft your backstory without having to play the previous two games.  On 29th you can head on over to the Dragon Age Keep and sign up to see what it's all about.  The video of the livestream below also talks a little more about the Dragon Age Keep, and the open beta announcement is around the 31:38 mark.  Dragon Age: Inquistion launches on 18th November for PS3,PS4, Xbox 360, Xbox One, and PC.   Watch live video from BioWare on Twitch  Related articles:  Co-op multiplayer in Dragon Age Inquisition detailed in Q&A  The Dragon Age Inquisition romance options have been revealed  Dragon Age Inquisition devs give further details on Skyhold  An in-depth look at character creation in Dragon Age Inquisition  Dragon Age: Inquisition character creator looks sharp and extensive  Dragon Age: Inquisition crafting system Q&A reveals more details  New Dragon Age: Inquistion PC gameplay footage at max settings  Dragon Age: Inquisition video offers more gameplay and customisation  Dragon Age: Inquisition could take over 200 hours to finish  Dragon Age: Inquisition 1080p on PS4, 900p on Xbox One, and PC specs  Dragon Age: Inquisition stream shows war table, PC UI, and spoilers  Dragon Age Inquisition website updates with race and class info  New Dragon Age: Inquistion trailer shows two dragons fighting
Here Are the Seven Out Athletes Competing in the Sochi Winter Olympics  Get a compelling long read and must-have lifestyle tips in your inbox every Sunday morning — great with coffee!  Just so you're on your gay-game while watching this year's Winter Olympics, here's a quick photo roundup of the seven out athletes competing for the gold. And they just so happen to all be lesbians. Very, very hot lesbians. They're also all from other countries, but still worthy of a woo! or two while you root for the U.S. To find out when to catch them on the tube, check out this great LGBT viewers guide on LGBT Nation.  1. Anastasia Bucsis, Speed Skating, Canada  2. Ireen Wüst, Speed Skating, Netherlands  3. Barbara Jezeršek, Cross-Country Skiing, Slovenia  4. Belle Brockhoff, Snowboarding, Australia  5. Cheryl Maas, Snowboarding, Netherlands  6. Sanne van Kerkhof, Short Track Speed Skating, Netherlands  7. Daniela Iraschko-Stolz, Ski Jumping, Austria
Elon Musk's Tesla and Uber may be hitching a ride together one day in the future. That is, if Musk's uncharacteristic silence during a call with investors was any indication.  Musk was reportedly asked about a partnership with Uber and waited six seconds to respond.  "I don't think I should, uh, answer it," Mashable reported him as saying during an earnings call.  The news comes after Steve Jurvetson, a Tesla board member, said that CEO Travis Kalanick would buy 500,000 autonomous cars from Tesla if the company made them by 2020.  Per Mashable, the conversation on the earnings call went like this:  During the call, Morgan Stanley analyst Adam Jonas asked Musk "is this a real business opportunity for Tesla, supplying cars for ride-sharing firms or does Tesla just cut out the middle man and sell on demand electric mobility services directly on its own platform?" Musk responded with an excruciating six seconds of silence, before sheepishly saying Jonas' was "an insightful question." "You don't have to answer it," replied Jonas. "I don't think I should, uh, answer it."  Of course, this isn't the only time that Musk has made, or hinted at, lofty claims about travel. His Hyperloop mode of transportation is, after all, getting closer to one day becoming a reality.  An earlier version of this article incorrectly identified Steve Jurvetson as a board member of Uber.
LouGehrig4 posted...  overall pretty fair except i think Dorsey should be higher than Ellis. Dorsey at 85 and Ellis at like 82 or 83. Dorsey was almost a consensus as the best player in the draft and definitely the best DT in the draft he shouldnt be the same as the number two  ---  NYG Super Bowl XLII Champs Baby!  NY Yankees - 25-26, DFA Hawkins or I walk!   I disagree. A LOT-A LOT of draft experts put Dorsey as "#1" and Ellis as "#1a" . Dorsey JUST edged it, but not by the two or three rating points you say. I'd say one if there had to be ANY difference!
A reader writes:  One of my long-term staff has a common, easy-to-pronounce Indian name, but since well before I was hired, she was given a nickname: a westernised version of her name. We were chatting about my (slightly unusual) name one day, and she expressed that she hates the nickname, wishes people would just use her real name, and that she's never felt confident asking people to do so. I offered, as her manager, to handle this for her, and she agreed, stating that she'd be grateful.  Responses were mixed but generally negative, and many of the team are refusing to call her anything but the nickname. The general consensus is that it's "prettier" or that her name "isn't very feminine." When asked directly, she finds it difficult to be rude, so will only say that she prefers her full name. It's now at the point where I'm having to inform my new senior manager that the nickname isn't appropriate, because staff members have informed her that the nickname is preferred.  I had a conversation today with one team member about this, and she informed me that unless she's told by the person with the nickname that she "only wants to be called by her other name," she will continue to use the nickname when speaking about her to coworkers or clients, or directly to her. I feel that this is vastly inappropriate, but without my staff member having the confidence to address this more strongly, there doesn't seem to be much I can do. That said, it seems disrespectful at the very least.  Should I push further on what, to most of the team, is a minor issue, or let it go and hope that my team member can stand up for herself?  This reminds me of last week's letter from the manager whose employee was harassing a coworker about her prosthetic limb.  That manager needed to use her authority to put a stop to something offensive, and so do you. You don't need to talk anyone into behaving respectfully; you need to tell them that it's not optional.  Your staff members' behavior here is, frankly, disgusting. They want to westernize someone's name because her actual name isn't "pretty" or "feminine" enough for them? No. That's not an option, they're being offensive and racist, and you need to require them to behave respectfully and not like the giant assholes they're currently being.  Talk with each of the offenders individually and say this: "We've talked about this before and I erred in not being clear enough — Parvati's name isn't Polly; it's Parvati. She's asked that we use her correct name, and that's what you need to call her going forward. I need you to be vigilant about respecting that request and calling her Parvati from now on."  If you get any of this crap about "not unless she tells me herself that she only wants to be called by her real name," stamp that out immediately. Say this: "No. I'm telling you clearly right now that she has asked to be called Parvati, and that I expect you to do that — and I expect you to do that without giving her any trouble about it. Can you agree to do that?"  You're asking that last part — "can you agree to do that?" — because you want the person to commit to it here and now … and if they're still reluctant, you want to find that out before you end the conversation.  But you absolutely, 100% need to do this. Your employee has told you very clearly that she prefers her given name, and you cannot allow her colleagues to decide to westernize her name for their own comfort. Get it stopped today. Seriously, this is horrible.
A woman and her daughter-in-law are raped and murdered by samurais during the time of civil war. Afterwards, a series of samurai returning from the war through that area are found mysteriously dead with their throats torn out. The governor calls in a wild and fierce young hero, to quell what is evidently a ghost. He encounters the two beautiful women, in an eerie, beautiful scene. After spiritual purification, he meets the demon in a thrilling fight. Written by xenophil
2015 Acura ILX 4 cyl, 2.0 L, Automatic (S5)  Premium Gasoline Not Available How can I share my MPG?  Combined MPG: 28 combined city/highway MPG City MPG: 24 city Highway MPG: 34 highway 3.6 gals/100 miles  2015 Acura ILX 4 cyl, 2.4 L, Manual 6-spd  Premium Gasoline Not Available How can I share my MPG?  Combined MPG: 25 combined city/highway MPG City MPG: 22 city Highway MPG: 31 highway 4.0 gals/100 miles  2015 Acura TLX 4 cyl, 2.4 L, Automatic (AM8)  Combined MPG: 28 combined city/highway MPG City MPG: 24 city Highway MPG: 35 highway 3.6 gals/100 miles  2015 Acura TLX 6 cyl, 3.5 L, Automatic (S9)  Combined MPG: 25 combined city/highway MPG City MPG: 21 city Highway MPG: 34 highway 4.0 gals/100 miles  2015 Acura TLX AWD 6 cyl, 3.5 L, Automatic (S9)  Combined MPG: 25 combined city/highway MPG City MPG: 21 city Highway MPG: 31 highway 4.0 gals/100 miles  2015 Audi A4 4 cyl, 2.0 L, Automatic (AV-S8)  Premium Gasoline Not Available How can I share my MPG?  Combined MPG: 26 combined city/highway MPG City MPG: 24 city Highway MPG: 31 highway 3.8 gals/100 miles  2015 Audi A4 quattro 4 cyl, 2.0 L, Manual 6-spd  Premium Gasoline Not Available How can I share my MPG?  Combined MPG: 26 combined city/highway MPG City MPG: 22 city Highway MPG: 32 highway 3.8 gals/100 miles  2015 Audi A4 quattro 4 cyl, 2.0 L, Automatic (S8)  Premium Gasoline Not Available How can I share my MPG?  Combined MPG: 24 combined city/highway MPG City MPG: 21 city Highway MPG: 30 highway 4.2 gals/100 miles  E85  Combined MPG: 18 combined city/highway MPG City MPG: 15 city Highway MPG: 22 highway 5.6 gal/100mi  2015 Audi S4 6 cyl, 3.0 L, Automatic (AM-S7)  Premium Gasoline Not Available How can I share my MPG?  Combined MPG: 21 combined city/highway MPG City MPG: 18 city Highway MPG: 28 highway 4.8 gals/100 miles  2015 Audi S4 6 cyl, 3.0 L, Manual 6-spd  Premium Gasoline Not Available How can I share my MPG?  Combined MPG: 20 combined city/highway MPG City MPG: 17 city Highway MPG: 26 highway 5.0 gals/100 miles  2015 Audi Q3 quattro 4 cyl, 2.0 L, Automatic (S6)  Premium Gasoline Not Available How can I share my MPG?  Combined MPG: 23 combined city/highway MPG City MPG: 20 city Highway MPG: 28 highway 4.3 gals/100 miles  2015 Audi Q3 4 cyl, 2.0 L, Automatic (S6)  Premium Gasoline Not Available How can I share my MPG?  Combined MPG: 23 combined city/highway MPG City MPG: 20 city Highway MPG: 28 highway 4.3 gals/100 miles  2015 BMW 435i Gran Coupe 6 cyl, 3.0 L, Automatic (S8)  Premium Gasoline Not Available How can I share my MPG?  Combined MPG: 25 combined city/highway MPG City MPG: 21 city Highway MPG: 31 highway 4.0 gals/100 miles  2015 BMW 640i Gran Coupe 6 cyl, 3.0 L, Automatic (S8)  Premium Gasoline Not Available How can I share my MPG?  Combined MPG: 24 combined city/highway MPG City MPG: 20 city Highway MPG: 30 highway 4.2 gals/100 miles  2015 BMW 640i xDrive Gran Coupe 6 cyl, 3.0 L, Automatic (S8)  Premium Gasoline Not Available How can I share my MPG?  Combined MPG: 23 combined city/highway MPG City MPG: 20 city Highway MPG: 29 highway 4.3 gals/100 miles  2015 BMW 650i xDrive Gran Coupe 8 cyl, 4.4 L, Automatic (S8)  Premium Gasoline Not Available How can I share my MPG?  Combined MPG
Get Chelsea FC updates directly to your inbox Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email  Inter Milan want to keep Mohamed Salah in Italy after the Chelsea winger's impressive loan spell at Fiorentina.  Salah, 23, scored nine goals in 26 games. He helped Fiorentina to finish fourth in the League and to last the semi-finals in two cup competitions.  Although they want to keep him, Salah is open to offers as he remains surplus to requirements at Chelsea. Inter boss Roberto Mancini is understood to be keen on a loan deal with a view to a £12million transfer.  Salah moved to Chelsea back in January in a deal which took Juan Cuadrado to Stamford Bridge.  But while the champions are relaxed about Salah's future they continue to maintain unsettled Cuadrado is going nowhere.  Blues boss Jose Mourinho said recently: "Cuadrado is not going anywhere this summer. I have a lot of hopes for him for next season."
If PC gaming had actually died on the numerous occasions when somebody has fumbled for and failed to find a pulse in its mechanical innards, I wouldn't even be here to tell you that it's alive again. Thankfully, as is clear by the amount of time and money it's possible to spend in these imagined realms, the mighty PC is not only in rude health, it has a cocksure spring in its step as well. Even EA Chief Executive John Riccitiello has noticed the swagger, telling CNBC: "The fastest growing platform for video games today is the PC". Thanks, Mr Riccitiello! "…but it's growing through subscriptions, through micro transactions and through downloads." Oh criminy, this isn't just a pat on the back, is it?  Actually, it kind of is, although it's also a chance for the big cheese to talk about the business models that represent the future of the PC and it's not a game on a disc with a hefty manual in a cardboard box, although you knew that already.  "There's a lot of power in free-to-play…and by the way, for what it's worth, free-to-play is anything but free. We have lots of games that are 'free-to-play', where paying users are giving us ten, twenty, thirty dollars a month. What happens is the first game play is free, but then when you get into the game you have to pay for things."  Well, that's hardly news either, although I take a certain pleasure in the phrase, "for what it's worth, free-to-play is anything but free". EA are serious about that model though and if free-to-play games can make a decent profit, support future development and find intelligent ways to section off content, my instinctive reaction against them could definitely be nudged toward grudging acceptance. That'd be a start.  Riccitiello apparently sees the strength of PC gaming in its diversity and versatility as a platform, with digital delivery at its core. Sales tracking, he reckons, is unhelpful: "Just five years ago people said that the PC game business was in a radical state of decline because NPD said it was down 10 percent, 20 percent, 30 percent, year-in year-out." Because of the new models, sales aren't accurately tracked and false messages can emerge.  There's also a mention of The Old Republic and the recognition that a subscription model "is challenging" in a "free-to-play world", but what I take away from this is that if a company as broad and established as EA can see the benefits of the platform, there's space for a thousand other interpretations of its strengths. Steam, Linux, the return of bedroom programmers, indie bundles, Kickstarter…it goes on and on.  There are so many exciting, infuriating, contrary and confusing avenues to explore in PC gaming at the moment that the one thing we don't need to be told is how alive it is. And it doesn't live or die on the say-so of any Chief Executive because it's not hooked up to any machine; this thing's got a life of its own.  Via CVG.
Just got back from RailsConf. It was a great Ruby & Rails conference, but I was struck by the dearth of talks about new features of Rails 5—because there just aren't many. I thought back to what excited me about Rails in the first place—the baked-in conventions, convenience, encouragement of good practices.  Justin Searls gave a talk not about RSpec but about how Rails is losing mindshare, losing favor. Is Rails losing relevance? I hope not, but it's easy to see how someone less emotionally invested than me might see it that way.  I'm trying to write about this without complaining. This is my fifth attempt. It's hard not to just rant about Rails' failings, so I'm going to try to be constructive by outline a fantasy roadmap for Rails 6.  I tried very much to think about this without going against the "Rails Doctrine", and have written this as if it were an Apple-style keynote. The theme is Progress.  Rails 6: Progress  Good morning. I'd like to share with you all the exciting changes we have in store for Rails 6. Since Rails was first launched 11 years ago, a lot has changed in the world of web development.  Billion-dollar business are being run on Rails. These business—along with countless others—have been able to use Rails to solve problems we never imagined. Rails not only enables small teams to ship great software, but it works for big teams, too.  We've seen Rails move beyond its role as "the single application" to being a part of highly distributed systems. The productivity gains developers get in the small, and in the simple, they get in the large and complex, too.  Meanwhile, there have been tremendous strides in what is possible in a web browser. Rails was born of a love of the web, and the web has gotten so much better over the years. The front-end has blossomed. We can now deliver amazing things to our users, and the community of web developers both inside and outside Rails has produced amazing tools and techniques for doing so.  Finally, the community of Rails and Ruby developers have over a decade of experience using Rails. A decade! We've learned so much about what it's like to maintain Rails applications over long periods, and how to best use developers of all levels of experience in working on Rails applications.  Rails 6 is the most revolutionary release of Rails ever, and we've rallied around seventh pillar of the Rails Doctrine: Progress.  Let's start with the front-end.  Front-End 2.0  Sprockets was way ahead of its time. Using remote=true was, too. Rails was one of the first web frameworks to actually acknowledge the front-end and include powerful tools for managing your assets.  The rest of the industry has not embraced these tools or techniques, but has instead solved the problems of front-end development in other ways. Although the tools used for front-end development are in constant flux, there are stable, mature techniques that have proven results.  Rails 6 will bake in the best of these techniques, and create an updated, modern set of front-end tools.  In Rails 6:  No more per-view CSS. Rails 6 encourages OOCSS and ships with Tachyons, allowing developers to style their views without any CSS from day 1.  No more per-view JavaScript. Rails 6 supports ES6 and ES6 module syntax to allow developers to structure their front-end code however they see fit.  Rails 6 no longer includes jQuery by default. Instead, Rails includes a library called rails.js that provides a simple and standard way to access Rails resources via AJAX without using jQuery. Rails.js can be used standalone, or in conjunction with existing front-end frameworks like React.  that provides a simple and standard way to access Rails resources via AJAX without using jQuery. Rails.js can be used standalone, or in conjunction with existing front-end frameworks like React. Source maps will be generated for any front-end compiled assets or code, if the source language supports it.  A new focus on simple plugability and transparent behavior. The one constant in front-end tooling is change, and a full-stack web application framework like Rails should give you the ability to keep up.  What Rails 6 doesn't ship with is a front-end framework. There's value in server-generated views, and a light sprinkling of JavaScript can get you a long way.  Next up, the controller layer.  Doubling-down on Resource-based Design.  Rails strongly believes in resource-based design. It's been a part of Rails since Rails 2. Too often, however, developers deviate from this design when without a strong reason. We've realized this happens for two different reasons.  First
Denizen[9] Profile Joined July 2010 United States 641 Posts #1 Alright so now Nony is known as Tyler. On liquipedia they say Tee-ler, on TLAttack they pronounce it like that, but i was watching his MLG Raleigh packing video and he said Tie-ler.   I am also confused if it is New-nee or No-nee.   And to throw it in there, does Idra say his name with a long i or a short i. Jaedong, Baby | Idra, Marineking, Tester, Nada  Issor Profile Blog Joined April 2010 United States 794 Posts #2 Nony is "new-nee" and "Teeler" is a joke because of the nony pronunciation confusion.  MICHELLE Profile Joined June 2010 Korea (South) 199 Posts #3 don't let Nony see this thread!!!!!! Artosis, he's like that moss that grows on a tree that lets you know where the sun is  Altar Profile Joined May 2008 United States 540 Posts #4 Its obviously No-nee, you can't pronounce Nony as New-nee, sorry Teeler but you cant. Heavens to Betsy  ecdN Profile Blog Joined July 2010 United States 93 Posts #5 "new-nee"   Watch some of his FPVoDs he'll say it.  Chairman Ray Profile Blog Joined December 2009 United States 11415 Posts Last Edited: 2010-08-27 03:53:33 #6 Technically it's new-nee, but no-nee sounds better IMO.  TriniMasta Profile Joined December 2009 United States 1323 Posts Last Edited: 2010-08-27 03:55:57 #7 I say No (like english word to deny) Knee (like english body part) 정명훈 FIGHTING!!! Play both T and P.  TriniMasta Profile Joined December 2009 United States 1323 Posts Last Edited: 2010-08-27 03:55:47 #8 + Show Spoiler + I say No (like english word to deny) Knee (like english body part)  + Show Spoiler + If you even considered that it's Teeler, you have serious English problems  Oh wtf I lagged... Sorry for double post  Nvm I pressed Quote by accident, and then I reeditted it T.T (sorry) Oh wtf I lagged... Sorry for double postNvm I pressed Quote by accident, and then I reeditted it T.T (sorry) 정명훈 FIGHTING!!! Play both T and P.  Magdain Profile Joined June 2010 United States 58 Posts #9 On August 27 2010 12:46 GobIin wrote:And to throw it in there, does Idra say his name with a long i or a short i.   Like the i in hill.   Like the i in hll.  micronesia Profile Blog Joined July 2006 United States 22962 Posts #10 On August 27 2010 13:03 Magdain wrote:  Show nested quote +  On August 27 2010 12:46 GobIin wrote:And to throw it in there, does Idra say his name with a long i or a short i.   Like the i in hill.   Like the i in hll.  That's because of Artosis changing Idra's name all by himself lol That's because of Artosis changing Idra's name all by himself lol Moderator There are animal crackers for people and there are people crackers for animals.  nitdkim Profile Blog Joined March 2010 1258 Posts #11 new-nee in reference to Newb Nony to make light of a loss?   I think it's just No-Nee. PM me if you want random korean images translated.  Hier Profile Blog Joined November 2009 2384 Posts #12 I pronounce "ocwouhgcfwoiqfeo" as "Mr. Brown".   It's one thing there being a few ambiguities in English pronunciations, it's a completely different thing to plain not know how letters are pronounced.   I find it appalling that someone pronounces "no" as "new". It might have been understandable coming from someone whose English isn't their first language. "But on a more serious note..." -everyone on this forum at some point.  seRapH Profile Blog Joined April 2009 United States 8705 Posts #13 On August 27 2010 12:53 Chairman Ray wrote:  Technically it's new-nee, but no-nee sounds better IMO.   my personal sentiment as well my personal sentiment as well PKMN 4313-1213-6695 | Inventory: http://bit.ly/19qYGOt  Noev Profile Blog Joined January
Important Safety Information  Do not use NuvaRing if you smoke cigarettes and are over age 35. Smoking increases your risk of serious heart and blood vessel problems from combination hormonal contraceptives (CHCs) including heart attack, blood clots, or stroke which can be fatal. This risk increases with age and the number of cigarettes smoked.  The use of a CHC, like NuvaRing, is associated with increased risks of several serious side effects, including blood clots, stroke, or heart attack. NuvaRing is not for women with a history of these conditions or any condition that makes your blood more likely to clot. The risk of getting blood clots may be greater with the type of progestin in NuvaRing than with some other progestins in certain low-dose birth control pills. The risk of blood clots is highest when you first start using CHCs and when you restart the same or different CHC after not using it for a month or more.  NuvaRing is also not for women with high blood pressure that medicine can't control; diabetes with kidney, eye, nerve, or blood vessel damage; certain kinds of severe migraine headaches; liver disease or liver tumors; take any Hepatitis C drug combination containing ombitasvir/paritaprevir/ritonavir, with or without dasabuvir, as this may increase levels of the liver enzyme "alanine aminotransferase" (ALT) in the blood; unexplained vaginal bleeding; breast cancer or any cancer that is sensitive to female hormones; or if you are or may be pregnant.  NuvaRing does not protect against HIV infection (AIDS) and other sexually transmitted infections.  The most common side effects reported by users of NuvaRing are irritation inside your vagina or on your cervix; headache (including migraine); mood changes (including depression); the ring slipping out or causing discomfort; nausea and vomiting; vaginal discharge; weight gain; vaginal discomfort; breast pain, discomfort, or tenderness; painful menstrual periods; abdominal pain; acne; and less sexual desire.  You are encouraged to report negative side effects of prescription drugs to the FDA. Visit www.fda.gov/medwatch or call 1-800-FDA-1088.  You are encouraged to report negative side effects of prescription drugs to the FDA. Visit www.fda.gov/medwatch or call 1-800-FDA-1088.  Please read the Patient Information for NuvaRing (etonogestrel/ethinyl estradiol vaginal ring), including the information about the increased risk of serious cardiovascular side effects, especially in women who smoke, and discuss it with your health care provider. The physician Prescribing Information also is available.
Bradley Ledgerwood, 36, is a proud Republican and an enthusiastic fan of President Trump.  He's also on a fast track to becoming one of Trump's fabled Forgotten Men.  Ledgerwood has been enamored with politics all his life. An active member of the Craighead County Republican Committee and the Northeast Arkansas Political Animals lunch club, he serves as an alderman for 342-person Cash, Ark.  Profoundly physically disabled, Ledgerwood participates in these activities only through the help of two government-funded programs that are now on the chopping block: Medicaid and legal aid.  You've no doubt heard lots about threats to the first of these, given Republican efforts to wring $800 billion from the federal low-income health insurance program. So let's focus on the second, which has received almost no attention, despite facing an existential threat from both the president and House Republicans.  (Elyse Samuels,Jorge Ribas,Alice Li/Astrid Rieken/The Washington Post)  At 2, Ledgerwood was diagnosed with cerebral palsy, which left him unable to walk, stand, bathe himself, eat or use the bathroom without assistance.  "My mom and dad are basically my hands and feet," he told me by phone Friday.  His mother, in fact, cares for him full time and has done so for many years. She was able to quit her job and provide round-the-clock care as a result of a special Medicaid program designed to help people with serious disabilities avoid institutionalization. The program pays for hours worked by in-home caregivers, which can include family members.  In Ledgerwood's case, the state has consistently determined that he qualifies for 56 hours of care, the maximum.  At least, it did until last year.  That's when the Arkansas Department of Human Services abruptly cut Ledgerwood's weekly hours nearly in half, despite the fact that his medical needs had not changed. With minimal explanation, officials claimed that a new computer algorithm determined that he did not need so much care. Other families experienced similar cuts in caregiving hours.  This cut would devastate the family's precarious finances. His mother contemplated returning to work and sending Ledgerwood to a nursing home.  "That would destroy my life," he says in no uncertain terms. Fiscally minded voter that he is, he adds that institutionalization would also cost the state multiple times more money than family-provided home care.  Alongside six other plaintiffs with disabilities, Ledgerwood sued the state — and won. The case is currently on appeal.  How was Ledgerwood able to secure legal representation? Not through a lucrative GoFundMe campaign, or lottery windfall, or some long-lost rich uncle.  It was through Legal Aid of Arkansas, one of 133 programs that receive grants from the Legal Services Corporation, a congressionally established nonprofit that funds civil legal services for about 2 million low-income people each year.  And low-income families, whether in red-state America or blue, turn out to need a lot of legal help.  In the past year, 7 in 10 low-income families experienced at least one civil legal problem, according to a recent University of Chicago NORC survey done for the Legal Services Corporation. Such problems include foreclosures, domestic violence (getting a restraining order, for example), custody disputes, debt repayment or neglectful landlords. The elderly, rural residents and veterans — all core components of the Republican base — are especially well-represented in this population.  A Navy veteran I spoke with over the weekend, 47-year-old Mario Figueroa of Daytona Beach, Fla., credited his local legal aid program with saving his life. He had fought on his own for two decades to convince the Department of Veterans Affairs to provide medical treatment and disability benefits for his service-connected post-traumatic stress disorder. He was successful only after seeking representation from Community Legal Services of Mid-Florida, another Legal Services Corporation grantee.  "People like to say they support veterans and stand behind veterans," he said, complaining that a congressman he met recently was more interested in a photo op than learning how to preserve veterans' access to civil justice. "That's just an empty phrase."  In the " skinny budget" released in March, Trump proposed eliminating the Legal Services Corporation entirely. At the time, this produced bipartisan pleas for "robust funding" for the organization. Nonetheless, last week a House appropriations subcommittee passed a bill that would slash the organization 's funding by roughly a quarter, from $385 million to $300 million. If enacted, such cuts would inevitably leave many families such as Ledgerwood's and Figueroa's to fend for themselves.  For now, Ledgerwood still supports Trump ("He reminds me a lot of Ronald Reagan") and remains confident
Still loading...  A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z AA AB AC AD AE AF AG 1 Team A Team B Team A bans Team B bans Team A map Team B map Decider Map Map A score Map B score Map D score 2 Week 1 Example Team Example Team Clubhouse, Bank, Skyscraper Border, Oregon, Coastline Kafe Consulate Chalet 2:5 1:5 - 3 Week 1 Example Team Example Team ? ? Kafe Border Oregon 6:4 5:2 - 4 Week 2 Example Team Example Team Chalet, Kafe, Bank Oregon, Skyscraper, Coastline Border Consulate Clubhouse 2:5 2:5 - 5 Week 2 Example Team Example Team Clubhhouse, Coastline, Consulate Bank, Kafe, Skyscraper Chalet Border Oregon 3:5 2:5 - 6 Week 3 Example Team Example Team Bank, Consulate, Coastline Border, Kafe, Clubhouse Oregon Skyscraper Chalet 5:3 5:3 - 7 Week 3 Example Team Example Team Bank, Skyscraper, Kafe Chalet, Clubhouse, Coastline Border Oregon Consulate 6:4 1:5 2:5 8 Week 4 Example Team Example Team Clubhouse, Coastline, Skyscraper Bank, Consulate, Chalet Border Oregon Kafe 1:5 4:6 - 9 Week 4 Example Team Example Team Consulate, Bank, Clubhouse Skyscraper, Coastline, Chalet Kafe Oregon Border 5:6 5:3 6:4 10 Week 5 Example Team Example Team Chalet, Border, Skyscraper Kafe, Oregon, Clubhouse Bank Coastline Consulate 5:3 4:6 4:6 11 Week 5 Example Team Example Team Consulate, Clubhouse, Bank Oregon, Coastline, Skyscraper Kafe Chalet Border 0:5 5:6 - 12 Week 6 Example Team Example Team Skyscraper, Coastline, Oregon Bank, Consulate, Clubhouse Chalet Kafe Border 1:5 2:5 - 13 Week 6 Example Team Example Team Oregon, Clubhouse, Border Bank, Kafe, Coastline Consulate Skyscraper Chalet 4:6 2:5 - 14 Week 7 Example Team Example Team Chalet, Kafe, Clubhouse Consulate, Coastline, Bank Border Oregon Skyscraper 5:3 1:5 3:5 15 Week 7 Example Team Example Team Coastline, Consulate, Bank Kafe, Clubhouse, Chalet Skyscraper Border Oregon 5:6 5:3 6:4 16 17 18 Example Team Example Team Example Team 19 Bans Picks Bans Picks Bans Picks 20 Coastline - 4 Chalet - 2 Bank - 3 Border - 2 Bank - 3 Kafe - 2 21 Skyscraper - 3 Border - 1 Kafe - 3 Oregon - 1 Consulate - 3 Oregon - 2 22 Oregon - 2 Consulate - 1 Chalet - 2 Skyscraper - 1 Coastline - 2 23 Clubhouse - 1 Skyscraper - 1 Skyscraper - 1 Clubhouse - 1 24 Consulate - 1 Consulate - 1 ? 25 Bank - 1 Coastline - 1 26 Clubhouse - 1 27 Wins - 6 Loses - 5 Wins - 8 Loses - 1 28 Border - 2 Border - 1 Wins - 7 Loses - 2 Kafe - 2 Border - 1 29 Consulate - 1 Skyscraper - 1 Border - 3 Oregon - 1 Oregon - 2 30 Kafe - 1 Kafe - 1 Chalet - 1 Skyscraper - 1 Skyscraper - 2 31 Chalet - 1 Chalet - 1 Oregon - 1 Chalet - 1 32 Oregon - 1 Oregon - 1 Consulate - 1 Border - 1 33 Skyscraper - 1 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100  Loading... Loading...  Quotes are not sourced from all markets and may be delayed up to 20 minutes. Information is provided 'as is' and solely for informational purposes, not for trading purposes or advice.Disclaimer NA matches Maps Player Stats  A browser error has occurred.  Please press Ctrl-F5 to refresh the page and try again.  A browser error has occurred.  Please hold the Shift key and click the Refresh button to try again.
In the last two weeks, Donald Trump has slandered the family of a dead soldier, committed treason by inviting Russia to hack Hillary Clinton's email account, admitted he lied about receiving a letter from the NFL, saw an Air Force mother get booed at one of his rallies, claimed Russia wouldn't invade Ukraine even though they already have, refused to endorse House Speaker Paul Ryan's candidacy, falsely accused a fire marshal of limiting his crowd for political reasons, tossed a baby out of a rally, and called Hillary Clinton "the devil."  That's as bad as it gets. CNN reports that even Trump's campaign staff feels "like they are wasting their time" at this point. John Harwood similarly claims a close ally of Trump's campaign manager Paul Manafort told him the veteran operative can't control his candidate and is now "mailing it in."Joe Scarborough, the conservative commentator, earnestly questioned Trump's "mental wellbeing" on the his show Wednesday morning. "There is nothing rational about this behavior at all," Scarborough said. "It's as if he's trying to blow himself up."  Four months ago, several observers floated the idea that Donald Trump was a self-saboteur. "To all outward appearances," John Fund wrote in The National Review, "Trump seems to be engaged in a form of self-sabotaging behavior in which people both move toward a goal and then from deep within do things to defeat themselves." This was a fair question at the time. Trump showed no interest in the mechanics of campaigning. He showed even less interest in policy. And he continually undermined his campaign with needlessly offensive gaffes.  A few days before Fund's piece was published, Stephanie Cegielski, former communications director of the pro-Trump super PAC Make America Great again, ran an open letter to Trump supporters. In it Cegielski argued that Trump was, in fact, a self-saboteur. "I don't think even Trump thought he would go this far," she wrote, "and I don't even know that he wanted to, which is perhaps the scariest prospect of all...What was once his desire to rank second place to send a message to America and increase his power as a businessman has nightmarishly morphed into a charade that is poised to do irreparable damage to this country."  More to the point, Cegielski added: "I believe Trump senses he is in over his head and doesn't really want the nomination. He wanted to help his brand and have fun, but not to be savaged by the Clintons if he's the candidate. He wouldn't mind falling short of a delegate majority, losing the nomination, and then playing angry celebrity victim in the coming years."  That last point about losing and playing the victim is critical. Trump is already working to seed the narrative. "I'm afraid the election is going to be rigged, I have to be honest," he told supporters at a rally in Ohio on Monday afternoon, referencing fanciful reports of voter fraud. The next day, in Virginia, he repeated the claim: "We gotta beat a totally dishonest machine...We're running against a rigged system, and we're running against a dishonest media."  This is a no-lose strategy for Trump. His core audience is disposed to distrust the media and all things establishment. By implying the system is rigged against him now, he delegitimizes the process in the minds of his voters, who clearly don't care about the facts and thus won't flinch when they're told voter fraud is a mythical problem. An ongoing study by NYU's Brennan Center for Justice, for example, found that "an examination of voter fraud claims reveal that voter fraud is very rare, voter impersonation is nearly non-existent, and much of the of the problems associated with alleged fraud in elections relates to unintentional mistakes by voters or election administrators." But this is really beside the point.  Trump has lied with impunity since he launched his non-campaign, and it hasn't mattered one bit. He appeared on Sean Hannity's show Monday night and said, "I've been hearing about it [voter fraud] for a long time. I know last time you had precincts were there were practically nobody voting for Republican and I think that's wrong...people were curious, how is it possible?" Like his claim that "thousands" of Muslims were rejoicing in the streets after 9/11, this is total bullshit. Is there any doubt Trump plucked this imaginary memory out of the ether? If a journalist was in the room, she would've asked which precincts he was referring to? Instead, Hannity, a consummate hack, mumbled a one-word response: "Absolutely."  There's no good reason to suppose Trump wants to be president. Running for president? Sure. That's a path to political celebrity. But he's given no indication that he's serious about doing the job. He
Disclosure: Design Improvised contains contextual affiliate links. This means that if you click on a link and purchase something, I may make a commission on that purchase.  Design Improvised also contains paid advertising banners. Please refer to our privacy policy for more information. Thank you for supporting Design Improvised!
Hi! If you're new here, you may want to subscribe to my RSS feed and follow me on Twitter . Thanks for visiting!  NOTE: Nearly a year ago, I ran a blog named Virginia's Secret Garden for the purpose of making fun of "red pill women" and their beta orbiters in the manosphere. I wrote under the nom-de-plume of "Virginia Robinson," a happy submissive Christian housewife living in the Midwest… who blogged about her sex life in nauseating detail. You can read more about the hoax here  Because I'm no longer updating the site, I've decided to let the domain VirginiasSecretGarden.com expire. Here is one of the articles I wrote for the blog, originally published on January 24, 2014.  Confession time: I don't like getting cunnilingus.  It's not that my husband is bad at it: he's had plenty of practice, both before and after he met me. But there's something about the act of eating pussy that leaves me cold.  Whenever my husband goes down on me, I just get frustrated and I end up asking him to stop. He knows how to hit all the right buttons, from massaging my clit with his tongue to fingering my pussy, but nothing he does can get me off. It feels unnatural somehow. My husband used to think my inability to enjoy cunnilingus was his fault, but he's never had problems making me orgasm from regular sex.  It took me ages to figure out what was wrong: cunnilingus is unnatural for women  When we ladies fantasize, what do we typically dream of? Penises! When it comes to jilling off, we buy fake, plastic vibrating phalluses, not tongues. Getting filled up and getting eaten out are two entirely different sensations. Compare to when guys get blowjobs; realistically, a mouth isn't that much different from a vagina. They're both dark, damp orifices that they can thrust into.  Not only that, I've come to believe that going down on a girl upsets the natural order of masculine dominance. Going down on a man is an act of submission; you're letting him stick his genitals in your mouth, for crying out loud! Not only that, when a man lets you suck him off, it's a gesture of trust, him telling you that he knows you'll take good care of his most sensitive bits. It's this dynamic that makes blowjobs hot in and of themselves.  When a man goes down on a woman, the dynamic is flipped: he's the submissive one and you're the one he's desperate to please. It's a complete perversion of the natural order. As much as a man as my husband is, I can't respect him when he's dragging his tongue across my nether regions, trying to find the specific combination of figure-eights and finger-thrusts to make me climax.  I might just be a freak about this, but I think any woman who excessively enjoys cunnilingus is a lesbian or has lesbian tendencies. Feminists promote eating pussy because they desperately want to be men and are jealous of the pleasure men get from oral sex, haha. I think it's time we ladies admitted this.  In the meantime, I'll keep getting my orgasms the old-fashioned way.  Read Next: The Inevitability of Female Submission  Get My Free E-Book Learn how to start a blog and make money from day one with this short guide. Also receive twice-monthly updates highlighting my best articles as well as news and special offers you won't find anywhere else. First Name Email I guarantee 100% privacy. Your information will not be shared.  Like this: Like Loading... Like Be the first to like this.
No more from <module> import <Module>!  Wouldn't be nice if…  >>> import pprint >>> pprint("hello") Traceback (most recent call last): File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module> TypeError: 'module' object is not callable  Was possible? Well:  Add special sauce: >>> import calldules Import module(s), call: >>> import pprint >>> pprint("hello") ???? 'hello' PROFIT!!!  Also works with such modules as flask , codecs , array , datetime , decimal , random , and many more!  No responsibility is taken for any grievous harm caused either by irresponsible or responsible use of calldules .  Inspired by Richard Jones' talk Don't Do This.
Get daily updates directly to your inbox Subscribe Thank you for subscribing See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email  A year after they last had a go to prise Darren Pratley from Bolton - QPR are ready to have a second pop at getting the former Fulham midfielder to Loftus Road.  Our colleagues at the Bolton News believe relegated Wanderers have given the go-ahead for the club captain to discuss a move to west London.  Bolton chairman Ken Anderson gave Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink's Championship side the green light to speak with Pratley after they made an official approach at the end of last week.  It's not known whether a fee is involved, or whether Hoops will simply take on the contract he signed last summer that has two years to run.  Pratley made only two appearances for Fulham from 2002-06 during which he was loaned to neighbours Brentford for a further 16 outings for Bees.  The 31-year-old Londoner then hit stride at Swansea for a laudable 177 appearances. It somewhat cemented his stay in south Wales when he hit a brace on his debut against fierce rivals Cardiff.  He then moved on to Bolton for a further 134 appearances and when Hoops made a move for him last summer decided to stick with what turned out to be doomed club.
Reading time ( words)  Introduction  There have been many studies of the causes of tombstoning; some published, some not. They tend to focus on a single process parameter as the root cause of tombstoning. However, there is no single process change that is a sure cure for tombstoning! Those that claim otherwise are either uninformed or trying to sell you something. Rather than limiting your view to a single solution, EFD recommends you heed all of the studies. Like pieces of a puzzle, each study does not reveal the whole picture, but looked at all together, the picture is clear.  The issue of tombstoning has risen to prominence because, while components and assemblies have become much smaller over the last decade, overall assembly processes have remained much the same. As components become smaller, so should your process windows.  There was a time when a type II solder paste and chemically etched stencil were acceptable for almost all assemblies. Throughout the 1990's, type III paste and laser cut stencil became the norm. For those using micro-components today, a type IV paste and electro-formed stencil are quickly becoming a prerequisite. Likewise, equipment that can place components within plus or minus 2 or 3 thousandths (while suitable in its day) is no longer acceptable when placing 0201's or even 01005's. Ovens too are becoming more accurate as well.  Why does a component tombstone?  As the flux and solder alloy liquefy and wet to each side of a component, they apply small amounts of torque through surface tension. The torque applied by the surface tension of liquid flux and solder has traditionally been a fringe benefit as slightly misplaced components were pulled to center.  However, this friend has become a foe in modern electronics assembly for tombstoning is caused by minute differences in wetting force from one side of a component to the other. When there is a sufficient imbalance in torque, relative to the mass of the component, the component is tipped upright (tombstoned), consigning the product to either scrap or rework.  Chip components have gotten much smaller over the years with many weighing in the milligrams. The same torque that once helped alignment now has the power to tombstone components. The only way to completely eliminate the tombstoning effect is to tighten your process.  There are many process variables that actively contribute to tombstoning. These include, but are not limited to, trace/board design, pad design, component and board oxidation, solder paste, stencil design, print process, placement process, and reflow process. Appropriate modification of one or more of these process variables will reduce or eliminate tombstoning.  Key tombstoning variables  Trace/Board Design - When board designers are laying out a circuit board, manufacturability considerations are often unknown or ignored. Having established that wetting force imbalance causes tombstoning, one of the primary causes for imbalance is the difference in temperature and, correspondingly, the difference in time of reflow between the two pads the chip sits on.  Pad 2 Pad 1  Example: if Pad 1 is connected to a wide trace, ground plane, or other heat sinking element. Pad 2 is connected to a thinner trace or less massive circuitry element. Pad 2 will often be hotter than Pad 1 and reflow before Pad 1. This temperature difference result in a reflow timing difference. When Pad 2 wets first, the wetting force from Pad 2 may be enough to overcome the force from Pad 1 resulting in a tombstoned component.  Pad Design - Mechanical advantage also plays a role in both tombstoning and skewing for the same reasons. The larger the pad relative to the size of the component, the longer the "lever" that the liquid flux and solder can apply.  When a pad is too wide, imbalance in force between side fillets will skew the component. When a pad is too long it lends mechanical advantage applied by the toe fillet making it easier to tombstone the component.  Chip component pads should be no larger than necessary to meet mechanical and inspection requirements. In some cases, visual inspection requirements for fillet height will prevent the successful elimination of tombstoning due to restrictions on other aspects of the process.  Component and Board Oxidation - Oxidation on either pad or component surfaces will cause slight delays in wetting. The difference in wetting time from one pad to the other can cause tombstoning. Quality products and proper storage practices will help to eliminate this factor.  Component Geometry - Capacitors, inductors and other "thick" chip components are statistically more likely to tombstone than resistors and other "thin" chip components. The risk of tombstoning is larger for the same reason as for oversize pads. The distance that the flux and solder wet up the termination adds to mechanical advantage.  Component size and mass also play a key role.
ESPN gambling writer David Purdum discusses the impact the ruling by the Nevada Gaming Control Board could have on the future of daily fantasy sports. (1:45)  Late Thursday, the Nevada Gaming Control Board concluded that daily fantasy sports constitute gambling under state law.  "Offering DFS in Nevada is illegal without the appropriate license," wrote Nevada regulator A.G. Burnett in a one-page memo.  The decision resulted in a cascade of reaction from industry stakeholders, with a considerable number of fantasy operators promptly ceasing offerings in the Silver State.  Why did this happen?  "I think our country had reached a tipping point with DFS where a definitive declaration was necessary," said Kate Lowenhar-Fisher, a gaming industry attorney at Dickinson Wright in Las Vegas. "The conclusion of our regulators was not surprising.  "Other [states] will follow, and it will be easier now that Nevada has declared a reckoning."  Multiple experts also noted the importance of Nevada's decision.  "Nevada is clearly the gold standard for gaming regulation," said Sue Schneider, who has testified before Congress on gaming issues and is the founder of eGaming Brokerage. "I think this will force the issue in determining the legality of daily fantasy sports.  "It was logical for Nevada to assert control over DFS," said Chris Celestino, a sports integrity analyst based in Switzerland. "It is the first codification of what most neutral observers already believe -- that DFS and sports gambling are one and the same."  What started this path?  Nevada's decision capped a dynamic week of developments in the fantasy and sports gambling industry, with the legality of certain fantasy sports offerings in the crosshairs of both state and federal government officials.  On Wednesday, the Wall Street Journal reported that the FBI and Department of Justice are investigating a yet-to-be-known number of fantasy operators. The focus is reportedly on whether the DFS business model violates one or more federal laws. The Federal Trade Commission may investigate too after receiving a request from Sen. Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut.  At issue is whether the nascent daily fantasy industry can continue to exist status quo or if DFS will be moved under the traditional sports gambling umbrella typically involving betting on point spreads, totals, money lines and narrow prop bets. Editor's Picks Nevada board: DFS is gambling, needs license The Nevada Gaming Control Board ruled Thursday that daily fantasy sports is gambling and will require a license to operate in the state. All unlicensed activities must cease and desist.  Report: Feds take look into DraftKings, FanDuel The U.S. Department of Justice and FBI are the latest to take a look at daily fantasy sports operators, according to a report from The Wall Street Journal.  Purdum/Rovell: Why the DraftKings data leak incident is significant David Purdum and Darren Rovell answer the seven biggest questions surrounding the recent DraftKings data leak incident, including why it's such a big deal and what the sports leagues are saying. 2 Related  The distinction is critical.  Daily fantasy sports' existence largely derives from the intersection of technological advancements and the Unlawful Internet Gambling Enforcement Act of 2006 -- UIGEA for short. The thrust of the law was to limit online gambling by making it illegal to process gambling-related payments.  UIGEA's opening section makes clear that the statute does not alter, limit or extend "any Federal or State law or Tribal-State compact prohibiting, permitting, or regulating gambling within the United States."  But UIGEA's second section also exempts certain forms of fantasy sports from the law's definition of "bet or wager" if such fantasy offerings meet several requirements. One of the requirements mandates that "winning outcomes reflect the relative knowledge and skill of the participants." Issues of skill versus chance have long impacted the debate about the legality of fantasy and sports gambling.  Daily fantasy companies point toward UIGEA's second section in support of their position about DFS's legality. States like Nevada cite UIGEA's first section as justification for any possible regulation.  Disagreements invariably ensue.  "Today's daily fantasy sports weren't envisioned when it got the carve-out in [UIGEA] in 2006," said Schneider in an interview with Chalk. "So this does need to be clarified."  Beyond UIGEA, there are a vast number of federal laws that could potentially attach to certain forms of fantasy, including many that were enacted decades before the Internet. Examples include the Wire Act of 1961 and the Illegal Gambling Business Act of 1970. Even tax code provisions could be part of any federal probe. For example, the Internal Revenue Code generally requires an excise tax to be paid on certain wagers, including those on sporting events and skill-based contests such as spelling bees.  Beyond the federal probes, the specter of state-level
Following on from the success of last year's London Olympic Games the inaugural Prudential RideLondon-Surrey Classic welcomes back the WorldTour circuit onto the capital's roads.   Unlike at the Olympic Games, where national teams took centre stage, the RideLondon Classic will pit some of the best WorldTour teams against each other over a course similar, but certainly not identical, to the one that saw Alexander Vinokourov race to gold on The Mall in 2012. Belkin, Cannondale, Garmin-Sharp and FDJ are among some of the teams who have already confirmed their participation.
Women would rather date a gentleman than a hunk.  Note to men everywhere: Quit with the push-ups and start working on your manners. You may think your six-pack abs are what the ladies want, but they actually want you to hold the door open for them instead.  A recent poll found that of 1,500 single Canadian women between the ages of 18 and 40, more than half prefer chivalry over looks and a hot physique. Although feminism is obviously on the forefront of the modern woman's mind, ladies like the idea of being taken out, wined and dined, and actually having the tab being picked up like men used to in the days of old. That's right: Courting is alive and well in the hearts of women everywhere; now if only we could get men to put it into action.  I don't remember the last time I was on a date and the guy even opened the door for me, and the only man I've ever met who stands every time I leave or return to a dinner table is my father — and only when we're out at a restaurant. Honestly, I'm shocked every time a stranger holds a door open for me or even steps aside to let me go into a building first. I sort of stand there, confused and startled, wondering if there's a hidden camera somewhere nearby to catch my reaction.  The concept of manners in today's society, exhibited by both men and women, seems virtually non-existent. Peoples' lives often move too fast to care about decency and the ego trumps all else. However, if we could all just slow down, re-evaluate how we deal with one another, and actually use the manners our parents taught us, the world would be a far more pleasant place. And based on this poll, men would be getting more dates!  What turns you on more in a guy: looks or chivalry?
https://www.quora.com/Do-tanks-other-than-Challenger-2-have-a-boiling-vessel-to-mak...  The American Army has ration heaters that will make tea. However, we don't often use them for making British tea. You'll recall what became of that stuff the last ...
To begin your search, enter a last name and/or a first name. You may also use initials or partial names if you don't know the full name. To request an obituary, email webref@slpl.org.  If you know the birth or death year(s), enter those as well.  Example: "david ja" will retrieve "David, Mary Jane", "Davidson, Jamie D.", as well as "James, David G."
12 Jan 2012 by maki  The Guy (also known as Max) and I have a shared resolution this year: We Must Lose Weight And Get Fitter Or Else. He has high blood pressure, I have high or disturbingly fluctuating blood sugar. But we both have this basic problem, that we love to eat good food. And, especially during the day, we need our tummies comfortably filled or we get cranky.  One solution to this problem: soup for lunch! Soup for bentos does mean either that you need access to a microwave at lunchtime, or using a thermal bento or lunch jar. But on cold days, this little inconvenience is well worth it.  A really filling soup is a meal unto itself, so all you need to do is to fill up a lunch jar and go. If you get really hungry, add some cooked vegetables and perhaps a little carb - some rice or other grains, a piece of crusty bread, a couple of crackers.  This very hearty soup that is almost a stew is The Guy's invention. The advantage of using meatballs is that they can't overcook - they just absorb more flavor and get softer and moister and more delicious. I did add a twist to it by adding some miso as a 'hidden taste' (you don't really taste miso, just the umami of the miso). Tip: Cut the carrots and celery into fairly large chunks rather than itty bits, to get the feeling you are 'eating' rather than just drinking soup.  I can attest for the fact that it is very filling on its own. The Guy snuck in some, packed in a lunch jar of course, during my last hospital stay. It was the best meal I had in there by far, and it was still piping hot after being in transit. This is not a quick-cook soup, so make it in quantity and have some for dinner, more for bento, and freeze the rest in portions. I'll show you how it can be packed as part of a multi-course bento in the next installment. I don't actually mind having this every day for lunch until the batch runs out.  Recipe: Hearty meatball and vegetable stew that's almost a stew  Makes 8 hearty servings  For the meatballs:  350g / 12 oz. lean ground beef  1 medium onion, finely chopped  1/2 cup or so dried bread crumbs  1 egg  1/2 tsp. salt  1/4 tsp. or so black pepper  For the soup:  2 medium onions, chopped  2 garlic cloves, chopped  1 tablespoons olive oil  1 bay leaf  1 teaspoon dried thyme  1 small bunch parsley  2 medium carrots, cut into chunks  3 celery stalks, cut into chunks  Additions to soup at the end:  1 tablespoon white or red miso  additional parsley (chopped or a leaf or two) for garnish  salt and pepper to taste  In a large, heavy bottomed pan, saute the 2 chopped onions and garlic cloves in olive oil over low-medium heat, stirring occasionally, until softened and translucent. Add 2 cups of plain water and bring up to a boil. Lower the heat to a slow simmer and simmer for about 10 minutes.  While that simmers, make the meatballs. Mix all the meatball ingredients together in a bowl - your clean hands are the best tool for this. Form into about 30 small meatballs.  Add the rest of the soup ingredients to the pot (except for the ones listed under "additions, plus 6 cups of water. Bring up to a boil then lower the heat to a simmer. Put in the meatballs (no need to brown them or anything beforehand). Simmer for at least half an hour.  Dissolve the miso paste in some of the hot soup liquid, then add the whole thing to the pot. Taste, and season with salt and pepper.  The soup improves after resting for a day or more. You may want to skim off the oil that accumulates at the top.  To serve, garnish with more chopped parsley. (Don't put the bay leaf or the parsley bunch in any of the servings.)  Estimated calories per 1 cup serving with 3 meatballs is 200 calories, give or take a few calories.  Freezing notes  This soup freezes very well - mainly because no potatoes are included. Frozen cooked potatoes turn into an awful mealy mush. If you want potatoes with your soup, just carry along some boiled potatoes separately.
BOSTON -- Brian Boitano never intended to publicly reveal he is gay until he was chosen for the U.S. Olympic delegation by President Obama last month.  Calling himself "a private guy," Boitano told The Associated Press on Thursday that he never planned to come out.  But moments before his presence on the delegation was revealed, Boitano realized what a powerful statement the president was making.   Mr. Obama chose openly gay athletes Billie Jean King and Caitlin Cahow for the delegation, as well.  Cahow told CBS News she has always been open with her sexuality with friends and family but was reluctant to make it an issue while she played. After retiring from hockey earlier this year, she said she became more comfortable talking about it in the public eye because of "undesirable policy" around the world.  Boitano said his decision to say "being gay is just one part of who I am" in a statement on Dec. 19 "literally came to fruition" moments before the White House announced the makeup of the delegation.  "I don't feel that I can represent the country without revealing this incredible side of myself," Boitano said. "This is an important moment, and to represent my country in Russia, it's a platform that is so important for me."  The 1988 Olympic gold medalist hopes other countries will make similar endorsements of an open way of life by who represents them at Sochi. He's proud of the president's stance.  "Our nation is at the forefront of trying to create a more tolerant public," he said. "The president is kind of saying to Russia that, as a strong country, we believe in this and if you don't follow along, we will leave you behind in this thought process."  Russia has come under heavy criticism for passing national laws banning "gay propaganda," and there were even suggestions for the United States to boycott the Sochi Games as a protest. But Mr. Obama rejected that idea, saying with "gay and lesbian athletes bringing home the gold or silver or bronze," a stronger statement would be made.  Boitano was in Courchevel, France, when Mr. Obama announced the delegation, which also includes former Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano, U.S. Ambassador to Russia Michael McFaul, deputy Secretary of State William Burns and presidential adviser Rob Nabors.  "I feel great about the delegation and being part of the movement," Boitano said. "It's important personally to feel I am representing the country and the president's message."  Moments after he released his statement in December, Boitano began receiving words of support from the figure skating community, including Olympic champions Dick Button and Carol Heiss Jenkins.  "That feedback for me is really important, especially coming from my peers," he said. "They know how private a person I am and that this was a big move for me."
As frail Gary Coleman leaves jail in a wheelchair we reveal . . .   The curse of Diff'rent Strokes  Looking frail and pushed in a wheelchair, former child star Gary Coleman was released from Utah County Jail on Monday. The Diff'rent Strokes star was held overnight with a $1,720 bail over an outstanding arrest warrant relating to a domestic violence case.  The former child star had missed a dialysis treatment during his overnight stay. He attends a hospital three days a week due to kidney failure as a child. Below, PAUL BRACCHI reveals how he came to this . . .   Frail: Gary Coleman is pushed out of Utah County Jail after an overnight stay for an outstanding arrest warrrant   One of them blew his money on cocaine and was arrested for shooting a drug dealer. Another was put on probation after holding up a shop. And the third member of the trio?  Well, he was picked up by police this week following 'a civil disturbance' at his home (previous entries on his CV - which in this case stands for criminal, not curriculum, vitae - include assaulting a woman in the street and allegedly trying to run over a pedestrian in his truck).  So what do you think they have in common. Is it: (a) they were all members of the same notorious gang; (b) they have all been on the FBI's Most Wanted list; or (c) they were all stars of the phenomenally popular Eighties sitcom Diff'rent Strokes?  Troubled trio: Dana Plato, Gary Coleman and Todd Bridges as the child stars of Diff'rent Strokes  Unbelievable as it may now seem - certainly to the show's millions of British fans - the last answer is the correct one.  Diff'rent Strokes revolved round a simple premise: the adoption by white, well-meaning millionaire Philip Drummond of two orphaned, streetwise brothers from Harlem, Arnold and Willis Jackson, played by Gary Coleman and Todd Bridges, and their enforced relationship with their new sister, Kimberly Drummond aka Dana Plato.  The show ran for eight seasons between 1978 and 1986, racking up 189 episodes, attracting the kind of ratings enjoyed by Dallas, M*A*S*H and the Dukes Of Hazzard, and turning Coleman into the highest paid actor on TV, pulling in $100,000 each programme.  Who could have imagined back then that we would now be talking about the curse of Diff'rent Strokes?  Drugs, depression, debts - these are just some of the themes that embroiled the three impossibly cute stars after they disappeared from our living rooms.  Arrests: Gary Coleman (L) in his police mugshot at the weekend, and Todd Bridges in court in 1993   Even for those making the notoriously treacherous transition from child stardom to adulthood, it is a particularly sad and tragic story, albeit one that has unintentional comic elements.  Let us begin with Gary Coleman, whose rather threatening police mugshot - or as threatening as any man standing 4ft 8in can be - is pictured here. His latest arrest was last night said to be related to an outstanding warrant for a prior incident.  Indeed, it is difficult to believe this is the same Gary Coleman, now 41, as the diminutive rascal who used to utter the catchphrase: 'Whatchoo talkin' 'bout, Willis?'  The star, whose growth was stunted by a congenital kidney defect, has been released on bail after police were called to the home in Santaquin, Utah, near Salt Lake City, he shared with his wife Shannon Price, who at 24, is almost half his age - and almost twice his height.  The pair were married in a private mountaintop ceremony in Nevada in August, 2007.   Coleman revealed it was his first marriage, and also the first time he had been intimate with a woman.  Child star: Dana Plato died in 1999 after overdosing on painkillers and tranquillisers  'I wasn't saving myself,' he said at the time. 'She just happened to be the one.'  Perhaps. But the relationship has been nothing if not volatile. In July last year, Price was arrested after a domestic violence incident when she trashed her husband's bedroom during a row.  Coleman, in fact, has hardly been out of the headlines in the U.S. - mostly for the wrong reasons - since Diff'rent Stokes came to an end.   He lost most of his fortune in a protracted legal battle with his adoptive parents, who had control of his wealth until he was 18. By the end, Coleman was left with just $200,000.  After menial jobs, including working as a security guard, he was forced to sell off his personal items; among them the bowling shoes he wore in Diff
by Preston James  Right now there is a quiet battle in Congress over the re-funding of Homeland Security which is set to expire February 27, 2015 and it is time to completely de-fund it, break it up and destroy it forever.   So far legislation to re-fund it has been blocked by Republicans over their unwillingness to approve portions of the bill which will supports President Obama's Executive Actions supporting amnesty and a path to citizenship for many illegal immigrants.  Homeland Security (DHS) is a criminal organization with no official mandate. It is unconstitutional and even worse it is an private foreign based occupation army inside America deployed to surveil, harass, abuse, tyrannize, disarm and eventually to intern and then progressively mass-murder all Americans.  The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) was set up by the Khazarian Mafia using Israeli-American "Israeli-first" Dual and Triple Citizen Traitors.  Now is the time to face this horrible reality that our American Congress was essentially bought by the various Israeli espionage fronts like AIPAC and the like, who basically bribed them to pass the bill authorizing this criminal, Unconstitutional organization DHS in the first place.  The Samson Option was used by Khazarian Mafia Kingpins to Blackmail the Bush2 Administration into pushing this illegal, Unconstitutional, unmandated legislation conceived in hell and delivered in hate.  It was noted investigative Journalist Seymour Hersch that disclosed the Khazarian Mafia's use of nuclear Blackmail on the US Administrations as well as other nations of the World to get the kind of new laws they wanted in order to complete their infiltration and hijacking of numerous governments.  The Bush2 Administration was informed long in advance of the 9-11-01 nuclear attack on America by Cheney who was in on the plot and communicated the cover story that the Administration had to go along with this and capitalize on the terror aspects to gain more power, or otherwise there would be more Cities nuked.  The cover story (Big Government Lie and False-narrative) used to push Members of Congress was that various American Intel knew of the plot basics ahead of time but did not coordinate Intel enough to figure it out enough to stop it. Some members of the House and Senate Intel Committees knew the full story and actually were a part of it.  These members of these key Congressional Intel Committees as well as some others key members of Congress have been alleged to have been paid 20 million USD payments as "set-aside allocations" in regular installments by the Khazarian Mafia to assist with the massive coverup about the nuclear attack on America on 9-11-01 by the Khazarian Mafia aka the Rothschild World Zionists and their Babylonian Talmudic Judaic Likudists and NeoCon Cutouts, quite a number of which were stateside and are Israeli-American "Israeli-first" Dual Citizen Traitors.  https://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_detailpage&v=5ACFnYjNH2o   This of course is Treason, Sedition, RICO and a plethora of serious and capital Federal and State crimes including espionage by a foreign power against the United States of America. If you want to see a rogue's gallery of who are the main perps of the nuclear attack on America examine this now classic article here. And if you want more actual proof taken from a formerly Top Secret AEC investigation released in 2003 to House and Senate Intel Committee Members, see this. Or see this for a quick video summary.  A recent Congressional study has shown that the DHS Fusion Centers have uncovered and prevented no incidents of terrorism inside America.  All DHS has done successfully is engage in illegal spying on Americans on behalf of the Khazarian Mafia. DHS was set up by former head of the East German Stasi, Marcus Wolfe who was hired as a consultant. He died mysteriously two years afterwards (or had a fake death with a new identity like Leonard Milman the apparent current head of the Khazarian Mafia who now resides in Cuba as his base of operations).  A few other supposedly deceased Khazarian Mafia Chieftain live there too about 40 miles from Havana, including one very wealthy liquor magnate who also supposedly died. Those who want to know the actual names of most of the top "Circle of Twelve that become thirteen" Khazarian Mafia Chieftains can visit VT Columnist Stew Webb's website or view his articles on VT.  As many now realize thanks to a Federal Lawsuit that was actually reported on briefly in the news but is now ignored, DHS was set up to be managed by sexually inverted females that sexually harassed top male management and moved their offices into the male lavatory.  Homeland Security has been working hard to militarize the American Police.  A primary function of Homeland Security is to Militarize the American police and transform them into cloned, mind-kont
| September, 2018 | Sun Mon Tue Wed Thu Fri Sat 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30  September 25, 2018  Militants shell humanitarian passage in Idlib - Russian military  Trump's UN speech can be viewed as election rhetoric - Slutsky  Lavrov meeting with Stoltenberg on sidelines of UNGA  New U.S. sanctions not to impede Rostec's operation - spokesperson (Part 2)  Georgian opposition wants constitutional ban on growing, exporting marijuana  Poroshenko, Volker discuss Donbas, Ukraine-U.S. cooperation on security, defense  Contacts on Syria in Astana Format at various levels occur constantly - Russian Foreign Ministry  Russian, Cuban FMs discuss schedule of bilateral contacts (Part 2)  Russia, Iran, Turkey discussing possible meeting of FMs on sidelines of UNGA  Russian, Cuban FMs discuss schedule of bilateral contacts  Cuban leader invited to visit Russia - Lavrov  Cuban FM intends to visit Russia  RUSSIAN, IRANIAN, TURKISH FOREIGN MINISTERS MAY MEET ON SIDELINES OF UN GENERAL ASSEMBLY IN NEW YORK - RUSSIAN DEPUTY FM VERSHININ  Lavrov, Anastasiades discuss Cypriot settlement  Russia, China may invest 20 bln rubles each in designing wide-body planes by 2021 - Manturov  Lavrov meeting with Mogherini on sidelines of UNGA (Part 2)  Lavrov opens meeting with Croatian president with soccer talk  Israeli Druze ask Moscow to help free 30 women captured by ISIL in Syria - Russian Foreign Ministry  Ten file to register as DPR presidential candidates  Ruble stabilizes on Tuesday evening  Main indexes of the Russia stock market for September 25  Results of Interregional Trading for OFZ & OBR  Aggregated results for trading of shares in Moscow Exchange  MOEX Russia stock index hits yet another high, oil cos lead  Capitalization of Russian stock market increases 0,43% on Tuesday  U.S. sanctions on Venezuela worsening situation there - Russian Foreign Ministry  VTB board approves purchase of 85% of Vozrozhdenie voting shares, to consolidate 100% in mandatory offer  New U.S. sanctions not to impede Rostec's operation - spokesperson
Forty years ago, Patterson in his pioneering work on lead isotopes defined the age of the Earth and of the meteorites with 4.55 Ga. We reconsider the question of the age of the Earth and its relation to the age of the meteorites, and similar to Patterson's approach, we use lead isotope systematics.  UPb investigations of three meteoritic objects on which early thermal and/or chemical events generated large U/Pb fractionations are outlined in this article: refractory inclusions of the Allende meteorite, phosphates in ordinary chondrites and basaltic achondrites. All these samples contain lead with highly radiogenic compositions (206Pb/204Pb > 150) and therefore their 207Pb206Pb age is almost independent of the isotopic composition associated with the measured 204Pb to within the precision of a few million years. The PbPb ages of the most radiogenic compositions measured in Allende refractory inclusions range from 4.568 to 4.565 Ga, the PbPb ages of secondary phosphates in equilibrated ordinary chondrites vary from 4.563 to 4.504 Ga, and basaltic achondrites show ages between 4.558 and 4.53 Ga.  These age determinations indicate precise time constraints for the classical scenario concerning the formation of the first planetary objects of the solar system. Formation of the Allende refractory inclusions occurs at 4566+2/ −1 Ma. Accretion of chondritic bodies occurred at a maximum of 3 Ma later. Eight million years after formation of the Allende inclusions, magmatic activity, including partial melting, magma segregation, and eruption occurs on planetary bodies. During the next 200 Ma thermal processing, shock perturbation, and heating takes place.  The meaning of an "age of the Earth" is evaluated in relation to the major early processes, end of accretion, core formation, and atmosphere extraction. A similar value for the age of the Earth is found based on lead isotopes and IXe systematics; this age is about 0.1 Ga younger than that of primitive meteorites. PbPb and IXe terrestrial ages are interpreted as mean ages of core segregation and of atmosphere outgassing, respectively. Within this framework, the "age of the Earth" corresponds to the end of its accretion and to its early differentiation.
Manga creator Roots announced on Sunday that a fourth season of the anime adaptation of his and artist Piyo 's Teekyū tennis manga has been green-lit. The announcement was originally made at the Teekyū High-Fiving Party event on Sunday.  Piyo launched the manga in Earth Star Entertainment 's Comic Earth Star magazine in early 2012, and the first anime season was announced just months later on the manga's first book volume. Earth Star Entertainment claims that this is the fastest television anime adaptation ever. A second and third season followed, with Crunchyroll streaming both series as they aired in Japan.  [Via Yaraon!]
Queen Elizabeth II of England is reportedly feeling immense disappointment today after receiving only a toaster for her birthday yesterday.  The toaster, which was purchased by her husband Prince Phillip, was on sale for £20 at Harrods Department Store, is stainless steel white and toasts two pieces of bread simultaneously.  Witnesses say the Queen appeared unimpressed by the gift, saying of it "Oh."  This would indicate a significant downturn from her mood last week, when confidantes say she was "very excited" about her birthday and had been "looking forward to it all week."  "She was really hoping for a puppy or one of those new Lego playsets," said one aide, who wished to remain anonymous. "She had a spring in her step and a sparkle in her eye. We all couldn't help but feel she was being a bit optimistic."  Aides say Elizabeth was heard having a heated altercation with Phillip late last night, in which she told him she would rather he bought her the new My Little Pony royal wedding castle.  "Why do you want that shit!?" yelled Phillip. "You'd get bored with it after five minutes!"  The Queen interjected that she already had a toaster.  "This one is better!" he screamed.  The Queen reportedly feels that this birthday is "even worse" than her 27th birthday, when she received England.
Image copyright Getty Images Image caption The weak rouble has kept inflation in Russia high  Russia's central bank has raised its key interest rate to 9.5% from 8% as it seeks to tackle inflation.  The 1.5 percentage point increase was higher than expected, with analysts having forecast a rise of 0.5 percentage points.  The bank has already raised rates from 5.5% at the start of the year but the moves have failed to combat inflation.  A weak rouble and a ban on western food imports has kept inflation stubbornly high.  "If external conditions improve, and a persistent trend for lowering inflation and inflation expectations emerges, the Bank of Russia will be ready to start to ease its monetary policy," the central bank said.  The new rate will take effect on 5 November. The last rise was imposed at the end of July.  The central bank said that inflation had reached 8.4% and would remain above 8% until the end of March.  Economic growth is expected to almost grind to a halt in the final three months of this year and in the first quarter of 2015.  The rouble briefly firmed after the bank's decision was announced, but then fell back into negative territory.  The rise comes as Russia said it would will resume shipments of natural gas to Ukraine after Kiev makes its first payment for previous supplies next week.  Trade row  Meanwhile, the European Union said it had launched a trade dispute with Russia at the World Trade Organisation (WTO) to challenge Russia's treatment of European agricultural and manufactured goods.  The WTO said the EU had accused Russia of levying higher-than-permitted tariffs on a range of goods including paper, palm oil and refrigerators.  The dispute is the fifth case involving Russia and the EU that has been brought to the WTO.
Depressed young woman (Shutterstock)  The United States has a shameful hole in treating mental illness. USA Today cites a 2012 report that shows a whopping 40 percent of adults with severe mental health problems, including schizophrenia and bipolar disorder got no treatment in the previous year.  According to Slate, this gap in American health care has created an opportunity for unregulated religious facilities posing as mental health clinics to take a dangerous role. Slate's Jennifer Miller interviewed 14 former staffers, ex-clients and families for Nashville-based Mercy Ministries — recently renamed Mercy Multiplied.  SPONSORED  The charity serves as an in-patient setting for exclusively female clients, aged 13 to 28. An insight into the philosophy behind the program can perhaps be gleaned from a speech by its founder, Nancy Alcorn, who in 2008 said,  "If there's demonic activity, like if somebody has opened themselves up to the spirit of lust or pornography or lots of promiscuous sexual activity, then we've opened the door for demonic powers. And secular psychiatrists want to medicate things like that, but Jesus did not say to medicate a demon. He said to cast them out. And that's supposed to be a part of normal Christianity."  One former patient, Hayley Baker, suffered from a plethora of diagnoses, including major depression and an eating disorder. She also suffered a history of child abuse when she entered a Mercy facility in 2009.  Baker says she was denied prescription Xanax by staffers while suffering nighttime panic attacks, and instead given a sheet of paper saying, "Peaceful Sleep," bearing a line from the book of Psalms: "He grants sleep to those he loves."  Baker, like other patients, was told prayer could cure her problems. In fact, staffers approached all problems with this one-size-fits-all religious approach. When one facility experienced an outbreak of mononucleosis, residents were made to walk through the halls and call for banishing of the evil spirits that were causing it.  Baker, who was molested as a little girl, said part of the treatment she was expected to perform was to imagine Jesus being present during a traumatic event in her past and absolving her of guilt associated with it.  "I couldn't make up Jesus saying something to me," Hayley told Slate. "I didn't blame myself for the abuse."  That answer wasn't good enough, for the Mercy counselor who pressed her to continue, regardless of her protests.  Another woman, identified as "Lily," was anorexic and at 23 entered a Mercy facility weighing in at a mere 80 pounds. Her treatment? Hands were laid on her as staffers prayed over her. She says she went along with the program because she began to feel brainwashed. When she decided she wanted to go home, she said she felt pressured to stay.  "They prayed over me and put hands on me," she says. "They made me feel like this was my only chance to live and if I left [early] there would be no more chances… And I thought maybe I'm the weird one for not having this open heart."  A former counselor called the program abusive, and said its expectation that women "graduate" in a certain amount of time is a form of victim blaming.  "Taking women who have very severe mental health issues and saying they're not choosing freedom when they're not 'healed' in a certain period of time—it puts the problem back on the girls," the counselor told Slate. "And they're already really broken and hurting."  Another troubling pattern is that in which some clients accuse falsely family members of horrific abuse — which is associated with a discredited and dangerous treatment of so-called repressed memories that can only be accessed through hypnosis.  At least nine families told Miller their daughters entered the program and come out accusing family members of horrifying sexual abuse. Seven of the nine families have lost contact with the women.  The parents of a woman named Ellen told Slate that while at Mercy, Ellen was encouraged to "empty herself" before the Holy Spirit, and "'Whatever the Spirit told us, that's what happened… She called this event her 'deliverance.'" From these sessions, Ellen emerged with a stories of sex trafficking and being raped by her father. She has cut off all contact with her parents.  Slate reports that at least two of the three adult facilities run by Mercy in the U.S. are not licensed in their respective states of Louisiana and Missouri.  Editor's note: this story has been updated.
Landmark Deal Protects Over 9 Million Acres Of Canadian Rain Forest  Enlarge this image toggle caption Barcroft Media/Barcroft Media via Getty Images Barcroft Media/Barcroft Media via Getty Images  A landmark deal 10 years in the making will protect 9.1 millions acres of Canadian rain forest on the Pacific Coast of British Columbia.  The protected area in the Great Bear Rainforest is about half the size of Ireland.  The new land-use order — reached between aboriginal groups known as First Nations, environmental groups and logging companies — designates 85 percent of the forest land as permanently protected from logging.  The remaining 15 percent of the forest will be "available for logging, supporting local jobs," a press statement from the British Columbia government says. The CBC says logging will be permitted there "only under conditions described as the most stringent in North America."  The Great Bear Rainforest "represents the largest tracts of intact temperate rainforest on Earth," according to CBC.  The Canadian broadcaster describes how Monday's agreement arose out of conflict:  "The agreement to protect the region was first announced 10 years ago, following a period of deep conflict between First Nations and timber firms over old growth logging that made headlines worldwide, and led to commercial pressure to avoid products sourced in the area. "A coalition between forestry companies and environmental groups was formed in 2000 in an attempt to resolve the conflict, with both logging and boycott campaigns suspended voluntarily in 2001. At the same time, parallel talks were taking place between the province and indigenous leaders. "An agreement between all parties to protect the forest was announced in 2006, leading to a decade of discussions and negotiations before that agreement could be fulfilled."  Enlarge this image toggle caption MyLoupe/UIG via Getty Images MyLoupe/UIG via Getty Images  There are 26 First Nations in the forest area, the Globe and Mail reports. Chief Marilyn Slett is the leader of one such group, which she says has lived in the Great Bear Rainforest for more than 10,000 years. Here's her reaction, in the British Columbia government press release:  "Today we celebrate the restoration and implementation of responsible land, water and resource management approaches in the Great Bear Rainforest. Ecosystem-based management is the modern term which describes what we have always believed and practised: If we use our traditional knowledge to take care of our lands, waters and resources they will take care of us. Our vision for the future is one where ecosystems and potential developments in the Great Bear Rainforest are in balance."  In reaction to the decision, Jens Wieting of the Sierra Club British Columbia called the rain forest "a landscape where economic activity will again begin to align with nature's limits."  The forest is home to a rare variant of black bear that has cream-colored fur, known as a spirit bear. As National Geographic reports, "it's found almost exclusively here in the Great Bear Rainforest." Also here in this "spooky, wild, mysterious place": "Grizzlies, black bears, wolves, wolverines, humpback whales, and orcas."  I'll leave you with this happy video of a young spirit bear learning how to fish:
Video  James Reynolds shows us round a polling station in Simferopol, takes a closer look at one of the ballot papers, and explains the voting process.  "There's no option on this ballot paper for people to keep things as they are," he notes.
The US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) is planning an unprecedented cyber attack against Russia in retaliation for what Washington calls Moscow's interference in the American presidential election, intelligence officials have revealed.  The CIA has been asked to lay out options for a "clandestine" cyber operation designed to "embarrass" Russia, the NBC News reported Friday, citing current and former officials with direct knowledge of the situation.  The report did not reveal much about the nature of the attack, but confirmed that the spying agency had begun "opening cyber doors, selecting targets and making other preparations for an operation."  One official claimed that CIA hackers had already gathered important documents that would implicate Russian President Vladimir Putin.  Putin seems to be a prime target of America's government-sponsored hacking attacks against the Kremlin, something that retired US Admiral James Stavridis made clear during an interview with the NBC News.  Stavridis called for breaching Russia's internet networks and exposing Putin's illegal financial deals.  "It would be very embarrassing if that was revealed, and that would be a proportional response to what we've seen," he said.  Earlier on Friday, US Vice President Joe Biden said that Washington was "sending a message" to Putin, in response to a series of hacks targeting the US Democratic Party.  Previously, hacked emails from the Democratic National Committee (DNC) had revealed an insider effort by some party officials to push Hillary Clinton's strong rival, Vermont Senator Bernie Sanders, out of the race for nomination.  American intelligence officials along with Clinton have accused Moscow of carrying out the attacks in order to tip the scale in favor of Donald Trump, the Republican ticket.  Putin rejected the allegations on Wednesday, saying the hackings "has nothing to do with Russia's interests."  A team within the CIA's Center for Cyber Intelligence is preparing to carry out the cyber attack, using a staff of hundreds and a budget in the hundreds of millions, the report noted.
Learn more about non-disparagement clauses and what accepting one means for you.  Question: I was fired a few months back. My employer said I was fired for performance problems; I think my employer held me to a higher standard than other employees because I'm a woman in a mostly male profession. I spoke to a lawyer, and he negotiated a severance agreement with my employer. They are giving me six months' salary and continued benefits in exchange for my agreement not to sue for discrimination. I just looked over the final agreement, and it includes a clause saying that I agree not to "disparage or make any negative statements, written or oral," about my former employer. What does this mean? Do I have to agree to it?  Answer: Lawyers refer to the language you describe as a "non-disparagement" clause. These clauses are often included in severance and settlement agreements, in which a former employee gives up the right to sue the employer in exchange for compensation.  What "disparage" means is open to interpretation. The dictionary says it means to belittle or speak lightly of something or someone; to act as if that thing or person is unimportant. In legal terms, disparagement usually refers to making negative statements about another person. But what counts as "negative"? How bad does a statement have to be to trigger a non-disparagement clause? What if you simply give your opinion ("I never liked working there") or state true facts ("They fired me for poor performance, even though I never received a written warning")?  The answers to these questions depend on how your state -- and your local courts and judges -- defines the term. Some might be strict, interpreting these agreements to prohibit only false statements, or statements that cause real damage to the other party. Others might be more lenient. Your lawyer can explain exactly what you're agreeing to, if you sign the contract.  Unless you and your former employer had a firm agreement to all the terms of the contract, then they tried to slip this final clause in at the last minute, this is all part of the negotiation. They are free to propose the terms they want; you are free to accept or reject them. If that non-disparagement clause is really important to your former employer, refusing to agree to it might cause the whole deal to fall apart.  As to whether you should sign the agreement, that all depends on how important your right to speak freely is to you. Some former employees feel very strongly that they must retain the right to talk about their experience, including the good, the bad, and the ugly. One former employee I knew wanted to write a book about getting fired, much of which would have been disparaging. In that situation, it was worth walking away from the deal to keep that right. Many former employees won't mind signing a non-disparagement clause: Their most sincere wish is to put the whole experience behind them, not to keep talking about it.  Only you can decide where you fall on this spectrum. If you are willing to sign a non-disparagement clause, you might ask your lawyer to negotiate more money. After all, you agreed to your deal without knowing it would come with this string attached. If your former employer really wants to settle your dispute, and really wants you to zip your lips about it, you might be able to get some more money for your silence. Your lawyer can tell you whether this makes sense in your situation.
One of five city councillors behind the expected firing of the city's transit chief suggested Sunday that more senior transit managers may lose their jobs for not "respecting the office of the mayor." "We will discuss whether removing some managers — and it may in fact be three, four, five — we may discuss whether that's the way to go," said Frank Di Giorgio, a TTC commissioner allied with Mayor Rob Ford, and one of the councillors who called a special TTC board meeting for Tuesday where it is believed chief general manager Gary Webster will be sacked.  TTC chief general manager Gary Webster is expected to face the axe at a special meeting of the TTC board on Tuesday. ( DAVID COOPER / TORONTO STAR FILE PHOTO )  Di Giorgio said the responsibility of the city's bureaucracy is to follow the will of the mayor and achieve the objectives set out by his mandate, which TTC managers have failed to do. "We're trying to eliminate some of the problems that surfaced over the last month that should not have surfaced and need not have surfaced." The city's uncertain transit future has been especially tumultuous as of late, as Ford's apparent unwillingness to compromise his underground-only transit vision has left him struggling to get that vision on track.  Article Continued Below  The mayor was sidelined earlier this month when city council voted 25-18 in favour of a competing transit plan — one that essentially restored former mayor David Miller's light-rail plan — championed by former Ford ally TTC chair Karen Stintz. Ford dismissed council's decision as "irrelevant" and, along with his executive committee, is continuing to pursue his original plans. Webster, a civil engineer who has worked his entire 35-year career at the TTC, has long drawn the ire of the Ford administration for his refusal to build an operational case for extending the subway on Sheppard Ave. E. or burying the entirety of the Eglinton Ave. LRT. It is well known at city hall that Stintz had been protecting Webster from Ford. Now that Stintz is no longer in the mayor's favour, Webster is exposed. The five councillors who signed the petition for the special meeting — Norm Kelly, Denzil Minnan-Wong, Vincent Crisanti, Cesar Palacio and Di Giorgio — represent a majority of votes on the nine-member committee, so they will be able to oust Webster if they choose.  Since he has come under fire, Webster has been praised by his industry colleagues and several councillors as a diligent professional who has simply put forward the best evidence for the city's transit future. Di Giorgio said Webster's integrity and job performance are not what is at issue.  Article Continued Below  "The issue is a matter of — in my view — whether a bureaucrat has the responsibility to undertake a task as mandated by the people and reflected in the mayor's mandate." Di Giorgio lamented the "one-sided" and "one-dimensional" information contained in reports from senior transit staff, which have prioritized light-rail and contradicted the mayor's vision for transit expansion in the city. "We basically accept as gospel what's put before us all the time as the best way, as the only way," Di Giorgio said. "I think we should start acknowledging that there are other viewpoints out there, which may have benefits that we're not aware of." Councillor John Parker, the deputy speaker who usually supports the mayor but has recently opposed him on transit, appeared to be comparing Webster's pending fate to the assassination of Julius Caesar in a series of Twitter posts over the weekend. "Woe to the hands that shed this costly blood," Parker wrote, quoting Mark Antony in Act III of the Shakespearean tragedy. "They that have done this deed are honourable; what private griefs they have, alas I know not, that made them do it." Parker — who is also on the TTC board — was coy when asked directly for the meaning of his tweets. But he was unequivocal in his support for Webster, saying it would be a "serious mistake" to fire him. "Gary is a solid, competent professional who has been given strong leadership to the TTC and good advice as to its future priorities." The future of the TTC board as a whole is also in doubt after a motion was approved last week by Ford's executive committee to change the board's makeup "to a hybrid, skills-based" committee of four councillors and five citizens, rather than the current nine councillors. Di Giorgio said the board needs to be "disbanded" and a new one should include professionals with "alternate points of view." Critics say the changes would allow Ford to appoint like-minded commissioners to do his bidding and plan the city's transit future without council's input. The item will be voted on by council on March 5. Since it is a personnel matter, Tuesday's special TTC board meeting is expected to be conducted mostly behind closed doors. TTC spokesman Brad
Sorry guys, Internet went down yesterday then I fell asleep waiting for it to come back online, i was 90% done with chapter 43 lol….This chapter will be the regular release for today, I will release a second chapter tonight then work my butt off to make it up to you.  My eyes almost popped out when I saw how many comments…. I was not trolling, I was actually planning a big release day yesterday until my internet died..but I did manage to catch up on my sleep lol 🙂  Lin Feng had fallen into a dream like state. In this dream state his soul had drifted from his body. His soul was floating through the endless darkness, it seemed like a world made only of darkness.  In this dark world, there was no sign of life. Lin Feng didn't know how long his soul had been trapped inside the darkness. There was only a single light within the darkness, it was a small radiant light which had fascinated him.  "What an amazing light!" The more Lin Feng approached that light, the brighter and the more gorgeous it became. He found out that the light was stretching through the infinite darkness and it was impossible to reach. The light had formed a spiral above his head and became a very familiar shape, it shaped itself as a book. It seemed like the Qi of the entire universe was within this book and had been there since the creation of the universe. This book had seemed to contain all of the information of the entire universe since the beginning of time itself. Lin Feng stared at the book as if it was a precious gift which had been given to him by the universe, his eyes were radiating a fascinated light. When Lin Feng opened the book and looked inside, he found endless words streaming through the pages. The stream of words began to flow off the page and into Lin Feng's body, it seemed like all of the information recorded within the book was being absorbed into Lin Feng's body.  "BOOM!"  A sound rang through the air, it had sounded like Lin Feng's body had exploded from the amount of information being absorbed through his skin. Lin Feng couldn't help but powerlessly sit down on the ground. He had returned from the world of darkness and was sat down on the floor. The night was still dark and the rain was heavily pouring from the sky, it had seemed like almost no time had passed while he was inside that darkness. How could he find that magnificent book which contained such information? How could he return the sacred and magnificent light within the darkness?  "Phewww… Phewww…" Lin Feng was breathing heavily. His body was shaking from the pain, his body had long passed the limit for how much pain he could endure. However he was still alive and thanks to that pain, he had seen a world of darkness which seemed to contain the secrets of the universe.  When Lin Feng had been suffering from torture a moment before, he had really thought he was going to die from the pain of having his soul shredded. The pain was beyond any he had ever felt in this world, how could a human being endure such a pain? The pain had been so severe that he had actually collapsed and almost died.  "Do other people have to go through such a pain and agony when they try to awaken their spirit?" Lin Feng was looking at the deep into the darkness of the night. He did not understand how so many people had awakened their spirit through so much pain, he had actually believed for a moment that he had died. Even though Lin Feng didn't think that he was gifted or talented, he did have some confidence in his own will power. He could not help but think how people with less will power than himself could even endure half the pain which had struck his body. When his spirit was attempting to awaken, he was filled with three phases of endless pain which invaded his body and shredded his soul. Each time he was stuck by the pain, it was more intense and terrifying than before. During the final phase, the pain was so terrifying that his body had actually collapsed, while his mind could endure, his body had collapsed from the pain. Thanks to his determination and infinite willpower, he had been able to endure the pain for much longer than his body should have been able. That is why he hadn't immediately collapsed and instead he had started to bleed from his ears, eyes, nose and mouth.  "Maybe, the moment when the spirit awakens is a different experience for every person. Maybe it was only like this for me because of my spirit." While saying his thoughts out loud, Lin Feng's heart started pounding and he released his spirit. Lin Feng suddenly had an indescribable sensation. His surroundings seemed to have completely changed. Lin Feng wasn't in the same place any longer, instead he had returned to the world of darkness. This time however he could feel his surroundings and was much more aware of everything around him. He had the faint sense that he could see and hear everything around
Will 2016 be the year you embrace—or revive?—your outdoorsy side? Thanks to the National Park Service, it could be, and on the cheap, too. In 2016, each of our 409 national parks will celebrate 16 days of waived entrance fees (and some parks will offer even more!). It's a fine way to celebrate the 100th birthday of the National Park Service.  According to NPS spokesman Jeffrey Olson, the tradition of fee-free days was formalized in 2009 by then-Secretary of the Interior Ken Salazar. Gratis admission was intended "to give people a break during the depths of the recession," says Olson, in addition to introducing people to the glory of our national parks.  Here are the 16 fee-free days for 2016, which include a full nine-day stretch this spring:  January 18: Martin Luther King Jr. Day  Martin Luther King Jr. Day April 16 through 24: National Park Week  National Park Week August 25 through 28: National Park Service Birthday  National Park Service Birthday September 24: National Public Lands Day  National Public Lands Day November 11: Veterans Day  According to the NPS site, "the fee waiver includes entrance fees, commercial tour fees, and transportation entrance fees. Other fees such as reservation, camping, tours, concession and fees collected by third parties are not included unless stated otherwise."  So find your closest park here, and ponder which gorgeous spot to visit here. Fun facts to ponder during your ramble:  April 16th—just after you've filed your taxes, natch—is National Park Week every year, and it's always free.  Fourth graders and their families have free access to every park in America for a full year, thanks to President Obama's "Every Kid in a Park" initiative.  August 25th will mark the 100th anniversary of President Wilson signing the "Organic Act," creating the National Park Service.  There were only 35 national parks at that time! Today there are 409.  Why offer so many fee-free days? As Olson says, "we're trying to touch everybody we can who hasn't been to a national park yet, to let them know these are great places."  It's tough not to get on board with that. See you on the trail!
Hours of Operation  Monday through Friday  8 a.m. to 5 p.m.  Mailing Address  The Carter Center  453 Freedom Parkway  Atlanta, GA 30307  Phone  (404)420-5100 or (800)550-3560  Email  info@cartercenter.org  Contacting President and Mrs. Carter  Please note: President and Mrs. Carter DO NOT respond to emails. If you would like a response, please mail your letter or request via the postal service directly to the correspondence office at the mailing address above. This includes requests for autographs or photos.  Scheduling Requests  All invitations for President and Mrs. Carter must be sent via the postal service directly to the scheduling office at the mailing address above. Please note: Emailing scheduling requests or invitations is not acceptable.
Modding group Zoombies have taken it upon themselves to port the zombie-infested DayZ mod to Bohemia Interactive's Arma 3 beta.  The ported mod makes use of the Arma 3 engine; however, as with any straight port a number of existing bugs from the original version of the game is still prominent, including glitches to zombie animation. The modders have also introduced a new inventory system to the game.  The official DayZ standalone title is still on the horizon. In January, developer Dean Hall confirmed the game's release would be rescheduled from its initial launch window set for the end of 2012. The game has no official launch date as of yet.
On Wednesday's "Late Night" on NBC, host Seth Meyers decided to go with a racially tinged joke about shooting "something white" during his monologue. And the audience's reaction could be the bigger story.  "This story is nuts," Meyers began. "A man in Arizona was arrested for unlawfully discharging a firearm after he tried to shoot the moon with a handgun. Well, on the bright side, at least he was shooting at something white. That's the bright side."  That initially caused several audible "oohs" from the audience. But those "oohs" soon gave rise to something a little more disturbing: wild applause.  Watch it below via Grabien:  To be fair, the initial "oohs" could show how the audience really felt, and the wild applause could be a way to deal with the awkward initial reaction. But that still doesn't explain away everything.
From Terraria Wiki  Not to be confused with the Wall of Flesh.  Flesh Block Wall is a type of wall. As with most placed walls, flesh walls are compatible with NPC housing and will stop monsters from spawning.  Used in [ edit | edit source ]  Desktop 1.3.1: Inventory sprite updated.
Originally Posted by simulatedworld Originally Posted by  In reality, most ISTJs don't want to be INTJs because they value Si more highly than Ni. Si is probably the most poorly understood of all the functions in general and so a lot of inaccurate garbage is written about it.   The ISTJs who do wish they were INTJ generally hold Ni to some magical standard, like some kind of superpower, when in reality it's not nearly all it's cracked up to be. INTJs have a number of significant weaknesses; they're just really good at hiding them in most cases so they seem less vulnerable than they really are.
This page describes an upcoming or planned feature. The content may be inaccurate and may contain spoilers and other speculations.  The following unimplemented features have a reference in the artwork and/or source code of Don't Starve or Don't Starve Together.  For features that were once implemented and have since been removed, see Removed Features.  See also: Unimplemented Characters   Contents show]  Baby Water Beefalo  " It's a tiny meat beast. " –Wilson " You may be small, but you smell big. " –Willow " He will grow very strong. Or she? " –Wolfgang " Your innocence and youth are but grains of sand slipping through an hourglass. " –Wendy " OPERATION NOT FULLY EXECUTED " –WX-78 " The young's odor wards off predators. And myself. " –Wickerbottom " Hey, little buddy! " –Woodie " Stop chewing my cuff links, wretched cur. " –Maxwell " When yöu gröw up, yöu will becöme even möre meat, meat. " –Wigfrid " Hey lil' fella! " –Webber " Stay young forever! " –Walani " You will fatten up nicely, with some proper grazing. " –Warly " Tis lubbable how ye don't lub th' land. " –Woodlegs  Baby Water Beefalo are a mob exclusive to the Shipwrecked DLC. While teased in art released for the Home Sea Home update, there currently exists no in-game textures, nor spawn codes for them. However, despite all this, character quotes do exist for them. While Water Beefalo do reproduce, they simply spawn a new adult Water Beefalo instead.  Broken Bits and Pieces  Broken Bits and Pieces are minable objects found in the Ruins. They can be spawned into the game using the spawn code "rubble" . When mined, they drop Rocks and Cut Stone, with a small chance of dropping additional Frazzled Wires, Gears, Gems , Nightmare Fuel or Thulecite.  Fat  Fat is a Food category which only contains Butter. It does not exist within the game, but is listed as a value in the cooking.lua files. In the Shipwrecked DLC, Coconuts were also added to this category.  " If I had any friends, this could take me to them. " –Wilson  "migration_portal"  Lava Pit  " Good thing it's contained! " –Wilson  "lavapit"  Maxwell's Head  " I can see into his pores! " –Wilson " He sure likes to talk. " –Willow " Scary head is twelve feet tall! " –Wolfgang " He sure has a taste for the dramatic. " –Wendy " IT APPEARS TO BE SOME SORT OF PROJECTION. " –WX-78 " I wish he wouldn't do that. " –Wickerbottom " Just a head, eh? " –Woodie " Hey, handsome. " –Maxwell " I can see intö his pöres. " –Wigfrid " Imagine the trouble he has buying hats! " –Webber " Woah, did I eat some bad berries? " –Walani " He must eat massive sandwiches. " –Warly " 'E's got them villainous eyes. " –Woodlegs " You don't intimidate me, big guy. " –Winona  "maxwellhead"  Quotes  Theis a structure exclusive tothat can be spawned via console and has artwork in the files. Character examination quotes suggest it was intended as a mechanism for players to teleport near each other. Its spawn code is. A structure with a similar function, The Lazy Deserter , was added inis a naturally spawning object in the Caves looking identical to Nightmare Lights , except for being colorless. It used to be accessible using the spawn code, but has since been removed from the game. When destroyed with a Hammer , the Lava Pit would emit light and start to slowly rebuild itself. Once it had rebuilt itself completely, it would no longer act as a light source.is an unimplemented feature. Upon being spawned via the console, Maxwell's Head will say, "You forgot to set a speech", and then, "Go do it.", using Maxwell 's speech sound files. Its spawn code is. Interestingly enough, unimplemented Adventure Mode speech lines for Maxwell's Head can be found in the game's strings.  Archipelago  "Fine. Just remember that you chose this."  Checkmate  "We're not so different, you and I."  "That's why I brought you here."  "That's why
by Yitzchak Schaffer (@YitzOfTheBits)  I have been thinking a lot about the best way to implement a realtime collaborative web app. WebSockets is the maturing tech of choice for this, and although there still seem to be some issues in terms of support, things are improving. Internet Explorer has support as of version 10. Mobile carriers and some institutional firewalls might implement some network-level impediments, but apparently it's possible to serve WebSockets over port 443 and largely escape this problem.  WebSockets inherently offers a two-way connection between a single browser session and the server; the broader context of what other clients might be connected to the application (such as in a collaborative setting) is outside of the scope of WebSockets. There are several solutions already out there for broadcasting across sessions; the most interesting to my mind are Socket.IO (node.js), Faye (node.js and Ruby), and Autobahn (node.js, Python and more). I decided to use Socket.IO to begin my investigation, based on  the high visibility of Socket.IO as per Google Trends,  a high-profile adoption by the Trello team, as well as  their fairly well-documented falling-out  and my personal preference at first glance for its API.  Disclaimer: This is my first experience working with node.js, so  don't assume I know what I'm doing, and copy-n-paste my code  go easy :}  Scalability  As I was proceeding with research, the one class of thing that kept popping up in blogs, etc. was scalability issues. I was not really interested in solving those problems within Socket.IO or figuring out if it is still an issue with the current release; for now I'm just maintaining a list of articles about the topic.  Instead, I looked for a way to incorporate Socket.IO into our stack without putting any scaling pressure on it directly.  Solution: use Socket.IO as a dumb transport  My experimental solution is to maintain a cluster of Socket.IO processes whose only function is to maintain the browser connections, and shuttle messages to and from a message queue. With this arrangement, each Socket.IO process is independent of the others, so there is no shared backend or storage to scale. These messages constitute both incoming job requests (e.g. "hey server, update a particular entity"), and outgoing announcements ("hey everyone, entity 123 has been updated"). I chose RabbitMQ as the messaging server for this experiment.  Caveat: I have not yet devised a testing plan to compare this architecture with a "plain" Socket.IO setup, so I can't say whether this actually makes anything better, only that it avoids any poor design that might have hampered multi-process Socket.IO installations.  Bonus: forced decoupling of application code  An extremely useful bonus involved the application code, as distinct from the transport layer. This insight might even be worth more to me than any Socket.IO-specific benefits.  I had been concerned, with these node.js-based server scenarios, about the idea of implementing an application server in JavaScript. Our team's server-side specialists (including me) don't have deep experience with node or JS in general, and with my bias toward type safety features, I personally have misgivings about writing complex things in JavaScript, as opposed to our usual mode of somewhat-type-safe PHP. (I discovered that @vanbosse utilized this same concept in his post dealing with a very similar application of RabbitMQ.)  When we treat all requests and responses as generic, context-agnostic messages, and let the application core pull them off a queue and "report back" in this generic way (as opposed to specialized ones like HttpRequest / HttpResponse ), we force ourselves to decouple the application code quite starkly from the transport layer.  In most "MVC framework" situations like working with Rails or Symfony, the best you can hope for is to consciously keep your code decoupled from the web framework you're using, and that takes discipline. Here, however, our point of departure is a "message-in, message-out" application – pretty much perfectly echoing the Uncle Bobbian Clean Architecture. (See also Gary Bernhardt's talk on boundaries for more architecture porn.) Not only have we made ourselves implement an ideal interface for testability, we have also freed ourselves to make open decisions about the messaging stack, and even change our minds later. Socket.IO not working out? Just swap in Faye, and all you need to do is write a new messaging adapter for the Faye-RabbitMQ interface. The application itself is unchanged.  Proof of concept: SockBit  To demonstrate this approach, I have created a prototype note-editing application
Omarosa demands that Pettifleur provide a full accounting of her book sales and pull the book from store shelves immediately. If not, Omarosa will sue for $150,000 for each violation of her copyright.  The reality star and Apprentice alum, Omarosa Manigault sent a cease-and-desist letter to Real Housewives of Melbourne star Pettifleur Berenger. Omarosa claims that Pettifleur's book Switch the Bitch: My Formula to Being the Champion of Your Life, Not the Victim infringes on Omarosa's copyright for The Bitch Switch: Knowing How to Turn It On and Off. Omarosa claims that the titles are too similar.  It seems Omarosa didn't really pay attention when she was on The Apprentice.  All Bark and No Bite  Like a yappy frou-frou dog, Omarosa's cease-and-desist letter is all talk. It has no legal ground to stand on.  Copyright infringement protects works of authorship, but identifying words, names, and symbols, such as titles, are trademarks. You can't copyright a title, so we'll focus on trademark infringement instead.  Title Trademark?  First of all, you can't trademark the title of a single book. You just can't. Under sections 1, 2, and 45 of the Trademark Act, "the title, or a portion of a title, of a single creative work must be refused registration ... unless the title has been used on a series of creative works."  So, J.K. Rowlings' Harry Potter series title could be trademarked, but Omarosa's single book title cannot.  US vs. Australia  Maybe Omarosa doesn't know, but Melbourne, home of Pettifleur Berenger, is in Australia. So even if trademark, not copyright is the correct legal issue here, U.S. trademarks only apply in the United States. They hold no power in any other country. A U.S. trademark would not be able to stop someone in Australia from using the exact same title with impunity. To protect her trademark in Australia, Omarosa would have to apply for a trademark there.  Not Even The Same  Trademarks protect against consumers mistaking or confusing one product with another protected similarly named product. But these two titles really aren't even that similar. They both use the word "bitch," and "switch" but that's about it. Omarosa's face is the key component of her book cover. So, the likelihood that consumers would think the two books are from the same source is minuscule at best.  So Omarosa, you can send as many cease-and-desist letters as you want, but you're not going to win a single dime in court -- not with a copyright argument and not with a trademark argument.   Follow FindLaw for Consumers on Facebook and Twitter (@FindLawConsumer).  Related Resources:
Verb  a man who took matters into his own hands and revenged the death of his brother  Noun  She swore that she would have her revenge.  She wants revenge against her enemies.  The bombing was in revenge for the assassination of their leader.  The team is seeking revenge for the loss earlier in the season.
On December 14, 1998, we had a day off at school. As an eight-year-old child, I couldn't be happier.  All the shops were closed and there were roadblocks everywhere. The streets were filled with Palestinian flags, and white and red striped flags I couldn't recognise. I asked my father and he explained that those were American flags, and that Bill Clinton, the President of the United States, was going to visit Gaza City later that day.  Little did I know that I would be hearing Clinton's name almost every day for the next 18 years, but it will not be on happy occasions.  The late Palestinian President, Yasser Arafat, had invited Bill Clinton and First Lady Hillary Clinton to inaugurate the Gaza International Airport . Clinton's helicopters landed on the airport's runway in Rafah and then took off to Gaza City, where Clinton addressed the Palestinian National Council in what went down in history as the first visit ever by an American president to a "sovereign" Palestinian entity.  Clinton's Palestine concerns  The following year, my siblings and I joined 65 other students in the newly opened American International School in Gaza, a school fully staffed by American and Canadian teachers, with textbooks that had come all the way from the United States to Gaza.  In the meantime, Senator Hillary Clinton joined Elie Wiesel in addressing "anti-Israel" and "anti-Semitic" rhetoric in Palestinian textbooks ( PDF ). In 2001, she sent a letter to President George W Bush urging him to force Yasser Arafat into changing the Palestinian Authority's "hateful rhetoric" as a condition for peace.  In 2007, she questioned Mahmoud Abbas' eligibility as a "partner for peace", given that textbooks issued under his administration were "inciting hatred".  This came after she co-sponsored a Congress resolution that supported the building of Israel's apartheid wall in the West Bank, which she defended by saying: "This is not against the Palestinian people, this is against terrorists."  Despite Clinton's passionate interest in Palestinian education, she had little praise for Gaza's American school; on the contrary, when two American supplied Israeli F-16 jets razed the school to the ground in 2008/9, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton had nothing to say.  Her indifference came as no surprise, and was no different than her reaction, or lack thereof, to Israel's destruction of Gaza's Airport three years after she herself had inaugurated it with Arafat and her husband.  Driven by a mission from God to spread peace and democracy in the Middle East, Bush pressed for a Palestinian National Council against all odds in 2006. But when Hamas, as predicted, won the elections, he approved a plan to overthrow Hamas by igniting a Palestinian civil war with the help of Israel.  In the meantime, Clinton was busy co-sponsoring a Congress resolution entitled, "The Palestinian Anti-Terrorism Act of 2006". The resolution, which was introduced after Hamas won the elections and taken over Gaza as a result of Bush's interference, denied Hamas any participation in the "peace process" unless it recognised Israel, disarmed and renounced violence.  The bill was signed into law by Bush in December 2006, and was effectively the approval Israel needed to launch its ongoing siege of Gaza. Effectively, Bush and Clinton tried to change the results of the elections they forced upon us with a violent civil war, and when that failed, they decided to punish us for making the "wrong democratic choice".  OPINION: Trump and Israel  When Hamas won Bush's elections, I had just graduated from school and was ready to leave Gaza to study at the American University in Cairo. From that year on, crossing the border out of or into Gaza turned into a fine experience of hell on earth.  The US, like any other country on a divinely inspired global peace-promoting mission, had decided to lead an international boycott of Palestine due to the failure of both the elections and the civil war it ignited in tipping the balance of power as it wanted it. The boycott entailed vigorous US support for Israel's complete imprisonment of the Gaza Strip's inhabitants with occasional military assaults - three in less than six years.  Doesn't matter who is in the White House  As a student activist campaigning for Palestine in the American University in Cairo , my colleagues and I found ourselves engaging in endless conversations with American study-abroad students, who had a positive opinion about the Bush administration's policies towards Palestine, to convince them of the results of the democratic elections that had just brought Hamas to power. After all, these students needed to know the truth before voting in the next US presidential elections in 2008.  Barack Obama was running for office and our hopes were up in the sky, to the extent that a group of Palestinians in Gaza joined his campaign over Skype , hoping that Obama's victory was going to bring a just solution to their misery. It didn't. 
The cost of the stadium has risen from £450 million to around £800 million TOTTENHAM HOTSPUR FC/PA WIRE  Tottenham Hotspur's stadium redevelopment is a significant step closer after the club agreed a £350 million funding package with three investment banks.  HSBC, Goldman Sachs and Merrill Lynch will provide almost half of the money required to complete the £750 million rebuilding of White Hart Lane. The rest of the funding will come from advanced ticket sales, a ten-year ground rental arrangement with the NFL and a possible naming-rights deal.  Confirmation of the commercial loans is a big boost for Tottenham as they prepare to announce their departure at the end of the season from their home of 118 years. The plan is to spend a year at Wembley before returning to a rebuilt ground on an adjacent site in north London for the start…
River Corridors identify the area that the stream or river needs to maintain physical / geomorphic equilibrium. These dynamic areas are also where a great deal of damage occurs during flooding disasters. River Corridor data can be used along with Floodplain data to direct new structures to safer locations.  Links to sections below:  A River Corridor includes the meander belt of a stream or river and a buffer of 50 feet. River Corridor as defined in Vermont statute:  "River Corridor" means the land area adjacent to a river that is required to accommodate the dimensions, slope, planform, and buffer of the naturally stable channel and that is necessary for the natural maintenance or natural restoration of a dynamic equilibrium condition, as that term is defined in section 1422 of this title, and for minimization of fluvial erosion hazards, as delineated by the Agency of Natural Resources in accordance with river corridor protection procedures. 10 V.S.A. Chapter 32 § 752. Definitions  River corridors minimally encompass the meandering of a river in a least erosive form. They are drawn with the expectation that new and existing structures outside the corridor may be protected from lateral channel migration using bank stabilization practices without creating new or additional hazards. Within a river corridor, existing infrastructure and improved property may be at a heightened risk from erosion and be more likely to require river management to protect over time.  The river corridor includes both the channel and the adjacent land. The purpose of the zone is to identify the space a river needs to re-establish and maintain stable "equilibrium" conditions. In other words, if the river has access to floodplain and meander area within this corridor, the dangers of flood erosion can be reduced over time. River corridor maps are delineated based on scientific, location-specific assessment of the geomorphic (or physical) condition of a river. The Vermont Rivers Program has designed protocols to evaluate river conditions all over the state. The resulting data are used to map meander belt widths. One can think of this belt width as the particular "wiggle room" a river needs to find its most stable path down the valley, while efficiently moving and storing its sediment load. The shape and width of the meander belt varies with valley shape, surficial geology (e.g. bedrock, glacial lake sand), and the natural channel length, slope, and width. The lower the slope and the broader the valley, the more sinuous a river will likely be, in a natural setting. Rivers that have been historically straightened or encroached upon lose their natural stability when they lose their meanders and floodplain access. Given an appropriate amount of lateral space, an unstable river can eventually develop a stable meander pattern. Meanders may shift within the corridor over time, but the river will be less susceptible to dramatic channel adjustments and accelerated erosion.  In Vermont most flood-related damage occurs outside the Special Flood Hazard Areas. Much of the damage is due to the erosive power of water causing damage to critical public infrastructure such as roads and stream-crossings. Homes, businesses, and community buildings have also been damaged by flooding-related erosion. Where stream meanders are confined by human activity, streams lose their equilibrium and become steepened, straighter and more powerful. The more powerful the flooding stream the higher the risk for damage.  Corridors are the space in which streams and rivers WILL move, and corridor protection is the fundamental strategy by which we protect lives, property, water quality, habitat, and the economic value of our streams and rivers. Chris Campany, Executive Director, Windham Regional Commisison Jan.2016  Today, most streams in Vermont are not in an equilibrium condition, because riverside development, channelization practices, and other historic land uses have prevented the river from assuming its most stable natural shape (meander pattern, slope, channel width and depth, sediment bars, etc.).  Vermont communities can choose to limit additional encroachment within the mapped River Corridor. Doing so can help streams lose flood energy in undeveloped areas and help prevent flood damage to existing riverside development from getting worse. While the River Corridor protects the stream's ability to re-establish and maintain equilibrium,  On the other hand it is important to note that while the River Corridor protects the stream's ability to establish and maintain equilibrium, the boundaries of the River Corridor do not predict where the stream will actually go. The River Corridor is not a predictive model and in response to existing encroachments and recent channelization practices most streams in Vermont are not in an equilibrium condition.  River Corridors include the area identified in many communities as the Fluvial Erosion Hazard Area (FEH). Many Vermont communities have secured Phase-2 Stream Geomorphic Assessment field data by which to identify and protect FEH areas.  Why Protect River Corridors - Mike Kline 2/2016  Back to Top  Some communities have already secured funding for a field
Easy Sourdough for Every Day  Sometimes in life, a good breakfast comes in handy. And by sometimes, I mean every single day. Breakfast is one of those means that I just can't live without and make sure that my family has a good meal before they go about their busy days.  Our morning routine includes rousing the kids from their slumber, making sure they get dressed, and providing a health breakfast for them as they go about their day at school and beyond. For us, that means making them something every day. Either in the form of eggs and toast, oatmeal, or fresh fruit and milk, we make sure they have something we know is good for them before they head out the door.  … It's not always easy, but we try!  Enter the Sourdough  Making bread at home is a lifesaver in the breakfast department. Homemade bread is so much more nutritious than most of the store bought stuff. It's so much more flavorful too. Whenever we run out of homemade bread the kids ask if I can make some real quick. While I can't just wiggle my nose and pull out a fresh loaf from the oven, I can plan ahead and have something made for next time.  Note that all the equipment that I've used for this bread is listed at the bottom of this post!  That's probably one of my favorite things about baking bread. People often think that it's difficult or that you have to be super precise but the truth is, baking bread is really a forgiving process and once you figure out all of the puzzle pieces, you can rearrange your baking cycle and come up with a schedule that really works well in your favor.  This bread was no exception.  I started it on a Tuesday after the kids got on the bus. I just mixed the ingredients and took the dog for a walk.   mixing  ready for autolyse  When making bread at home, one of the most impactful things you can do is let it rest. "Autolyse" comes from the word "autolysis" which means "self digest". In other words, the dough starts to eat the nutrients in the ingredients and gluten starts to form and flavor starts to develop. This autolyse period is often forgotten or skipped with great detriment to the overall result of your loaf in terms of crust, crumb, and flavor.   I let this dough autolyse for about half an hour before adding the salt and the diastatic malt powder, then I mixed it in the KitchenAid for about 10 minutes on first speed (the one past "mix").   A brief word on diastatic malt powder. I use it exclusively for sourdough breads. The diastatic malt powder acts as a "slow burn" type of fuel for the bread. It provides the bacteria in the bread the food that it needs to keep the bread going in the right direction over the period of a few days. I don't use much, usually just .5% (in this case it amounted to only 3 grams) but it's enough to make a difference.   After mixing the dough I let it rest at room temperature while I left for work. I normally come home around lunch time to take the dog for a walk so at lunchtime I put the dough in the fridge until I was ready to continue.   covered and ready to chill  When I got home from work took it out of the fridge and let it acclimate to room temperature for about 2 or 3 hours. Then I did a few rounds of stretch and folds spread about 45 minutes apart.   After the third stretch and fold I shaped it and put it in a floured proofing basket, covered it in plastic and put it in the fridge.  The next evening I finally was ready to bake, so I remove it from the fridge and preheated the oven to 450˚F for about 45 minutes.  I carefully slid the bread on to the covered Emile Henry cloche and baked it with the lid for 28 minutes (let me real, it was half an hour!) and without the lid for another 15.  Once it was baked I removed it and put it on a cooling tray for about half an hour before tasting it. It was worth the wait and made for a delicious breakfast this morning!  Everyday Sourdough Bread Recipe  Starter build  100g whole wheat  100ml water  Dough  150g whole wheat  300g AP flour  275ml water  14g salt  3g diastatic malt powder   Take all of the ingredients minus the salt and malt powder and combine.  Cover and let autolyse for 45 minutes.  Knead in the mixer or by hand until well developed. This was about 10 minutes in the mixer at first speed (the one past the
You probably don't need us to tell you just how important it is to download antivirus software for your computer and mobile devices in 2018. But where we can help is to tell you what the best antivirus is right now, having tested and reviewed the latest packages from the biggest names in cyber security.  Hackers are always coming up with new ways to gain access to your PC and other internet enabled devices (with your mobile phone and tablet included). Luckily the best antivirus companies are constantly updating their security software packages. We're already starting to see their 2019 packages come to market, with user experience tweaks and the latest protection against phishing scams, ransomware and all other types of viruses and malware.  Right now, we think that Bitdefender Antivirus Plus 2019 is the best antivirus that your money can buy (or head here for UK pricing ). It combines watertight antivirus tools with an array of other excellent security features and is super easy to use, too. You can read more about what it offers below, together with Norton AntiVirus and Webroot SecureAnywhere that complete our top three.  You want to make sure you get a complete suite of security tools that the best antivirus software can provide. If you're looking for all-round protection against the latest cyber threats, then investing in the best antivirus download is the best solution you can hope for in 2018 - and we also have the best business antivirus plans if you're looking from a company perspective. That doesn't mean you have to start spending big money either, as our guide also gives you the best available prices for your PC's protection.  Bitdefender Antivirus Plus offers the most accurate and reliable protection around and has received several awards  Rock-solid and reliable protection  Antivirus Plus 1 Year $25.99 /year ? Visit Site at Bitdefender  Accurate  Password manager  Cheap subscription  Can be resource-hungry  In a world packed with free security software, Bitdefender Antivirus Plus 2019's annual fee may look expensive, but there's plenty of bang for your buck. Plus, we've secured a discount for TechRadar readers so you can be sure that the prices you see on this page won't be lower anywhere else.  Take a look at any rankings of big independent antivirus testers and Bitdefender's premium security products always rise to the top.  It tends to be reliable and accurate in its virus vanquishing, featuring web filtering to blocks access to malicious sites, a secure browser that keeps your online banking ans shopping transactions safe, and there's a password manager which auto-completes credit card details in web forms. It also scores high for its excellent anti-phishing module, which alerts you to malicious links in your search engine results and blocks access to dangerous sites.  New for the 2019 version of Antivirus Plus are multi-layer ransomeware protection the learns the behaviour of such threats to keep you safe as well as the ability to scan all your linked devices via the Bitdefender Central mobile app.  There are one or two issues – it grabs more resources than average, and might conflict with some programs – but Bitdefender Antivirus Plus 2019 is still a likeable package which offers excellent detection rates, great performance, and more than enough bonus features to justify the price.  Bitdefender Internet Security 2019 builds on AVP 2019 and triples the number of devices covered plus offers anti-spam, firewall, parental advisor and file encryption features.  For a little bit more you can purchase the Total Security 2019 edition. It adds all of the above and covers up to five PCs, Macs, Android and iOS devices.  US  UK  Norton AntiVirus Basic will protect your PC without being a system hog  Great value protection that won't slow you down  Norton AntiVirus Basic 1 Year $14.99 /year ? Visit Site at Norton by Symantec  Blocks even brand new malware  Low impact on system resources  Browser extension extras can be unreliable  Norton AntiVirus Basic is a top quality malware hunter which can automatically protect your PC all on its own - that's a given. But one of the main reasons we've boosted it to number two in our best antivirus software rankings is because it's also one of the very best value paid-for security software solutions on the market in 2018. You can get it at a rock bottom price.  Norton offers plenty of tweaks, options and settings for those who need them, as well as features like a handy URL blocker that keeps you away from malicious websites. If that misses something, an excellent file reputation service recognises suspect downloads immediately. And if malware still finds a way through, intelligent behaviour monitoring kills it at the first sign of trouble.  If you're a more hands-on type
Click here for coverage of the 2013 Masters Tournament and TV schedules   Golf's first major tournament of the year, The Masters, returns to Augusta National Golf Club in Augusta, Ga., April 5-8 as the top players in the game compete for the coveted green jacket and a place in golf history. Rory McIlroy, Luke Donald, Lee Westwood, Martin Kaymer and Steve Stricker are among the favorites, but one can never count out Tiger Woods. South Africa's Charl Schwartzel (pictured) birdied the final four holes to capture his first major win at last year's Masters. ESPN and CBS share coverage of the tournament through Sunday.  RELATED STORY: McIlroy looks to challenge Woods, Mickelson at Masters  Masters TV schedule below, followed by press releases from CBS, ESPN and GOLF CHANNEL:  2012 Masters TV Schedule  Thursday, April 5 — First Round, 3-7:30pm ET (ESPN)  Friday, April 5 — Second Round, 3-7:30pm ET (ESPN)  Saturday, April 6 — Third Round, 3:30-7pm ET (CBS)  Sunday, April 7 — Final Round, 2-7pm ET (CBS)  WORLD'S BEST GOLFERS COMPETE FOR COVETED GREEN JACKET AT 2012 MASTERS®  CBS SPORTS BROADCASTS MASTERS® FOR 57th CONSECUTIVE YEAR  Masters® Is Longest-Running Sporting Event Broadcast on One Network  The Masters®, the most renowned tournament in golf, will be broadcast on CBS for the 57th consecutive year from the majestic setting of Augusta National Golf Club in Augusta, Ga. This year marks the 76th Masters Tournament, one of the most highly-anticipated sporting events of the year. Last year, South African Charl Schwartzel won his first Green Jacket with a record-setting birdie run on the final four holes. His birdie on the 18th hole capped off one of the most thrilling conclusions in the history of the Tournament as Schwartzel overtook Rory McIlroy, the 54-hole leader, Jason Day, Adam Scott, Tiger Woods, Geoff Ogilvy and Luke Donald.  CBS Sports will bring viewers all the color, artistry and drama inherent to the world's most prestigious golf tournament and first major of the year with live third-round coverage of the Masters on Saturday, April 7 (3:30-7:00 PM, ET). Final-round 18-hole coverage is scheduled for Sunday, April 8 (2:00-7:00 PM, ET). Highlights of early-round play will be presented by CBS Sports on Thursday, April 5 and Friday, April 6 (11:35-11:50 PM, ET; both nights).  For the 27th consecutive year Jim Nantz will cover the Masters for CBS (his 25th year as host). He also handles coverage of the Highlight Shows, originating from Butler Cabin on the grounds of Augusta National. Three-time Masters champion Sir Nick Faldo joins Nantz in the 18th hole tower as lead analyst. Peter Oosterhuis will describe the action at the 17th hole; Verne Lundquist, the 16th hole; David Feherty, the 15th hole and Highlight Shows; Bill Macatee, the 14th hole; Peter Kostis, the 13th hole; and Ian Baker-Finch will tell the story at the 11th and 12th holes. Grant Boone and Matt Gogel call the live streaming video action for Amen Corner, along with Jerry Foltz and Billy Ray Brown for 15 & 16 and Andrew Catalon and Billy Kratzert for Featured Group and Jennifer Mills, Peter Oosterhuis and Kratzert call the action for Masters On The Range.  Augusta National, home of the Masters since its inception in 1934, is the unrivaled host to the world's greatest players and the most memorable moments in golf. Schwartzel returns to Augusta to lead the tournament field of invitees, which is considered America's most prestigious gathering of professional and amateur golfers. The 2012 tournament field of invitees expected to compete includes past Masters champions Woods, Phil Mickelson, Angel Cabrera, Vijay Singh, Mike Weir, Jose Maria Olazabal, Mark O'Meara, Trevor Immelman, Larry Mize, Ben Crenshaw, Fred Couples, Craig Stadler, Tom Watson, Zach Johnson, Bernhard Langer, Ian Woosnam and Sandy Lyle. Other U.S. players include Keegan Bradley, Dustin Johnson, Rickie Fowler, Bubba Watson, Jim Furyk, Steve Stricker, Stewart Cink, Sean O'Hair, Nick Watney, Hunter Mahan and Matt Kuchar. Other international stars include Donald, McIlroy, Scott, Day, Ogilvy, Lee Westwood, Ian P
There's a thread over there right now about the TPP and what leftists can do to stop it. Reading the comments, you would swear you were reading a strategic brainstorm post for democrats.  They suggest all the failed tactics, show a woeful misunderstanding of the state of a majority of unions in the US, and suggest we wait for a "lame duck" session and try to build significant opposition to it before hand.  What the fuck is this?
Results 1–20 of 201 for speaker:Laura Pidcock  Sort by relevance  Sorted by date: newest / oldest  Group by person  Insecure Work and the Gig Economy (20 Jun 2018) Laura Pidcock: I congratulate my hon. Friend the Member for Barnsley East (Stephanie Peacock) on securing this important debate, and on the thoughtful, passionate contributions made by colleagues today—all but one of them from the Opposition. It seems that the Government's ruthless whipping ended with the last vote to happen in the Chamber. My hon. Friend eloquently captured the fear and...  Insecure Work and the Gig Economy (20 Jun 2018) Laura Pidcock: It is absolutely nonsensical that the state should subsidise inordinate profits on the one hand and very poor pay on the other. The reality of modern work for millions of people, particularly in the north and in places such as North West Durham, is short-termism, insecurity, low pay and fear. Fixed-term contracts, enforced self-employment and agency work signal a move towards a more...  Insecure Work and the Gig Economy (20 Jun 2018) Laura Pidcock: I have very little time; I am sorry. A whole industry has exploded to formalise and professionalise insecurity at work, including through the use and abuse of new technology. It is absolutely right that we view that as the challenge of our generation. How we meet the challenges of technology replacing management structures with apps essentially being the employer is one of the most pressing...  Insecure Work and the Gig Economy (20 Jun 2018) Laura Pidcock: I am so sorry; I cannot. I have gone over my time already, and I want to ensure that my hon. Friend the Member for Barnsley East manages to sum up. Hon. Members have given the Minister many solutions for zero-hours contracts, such as the Swedish derogation, equal rights for agency workers and, crucially, enforcement —things will not improve without enforcement. It is only with workers...  Written Answers — Department of Health and Social Care: Mental Illness: Next of Kin (19 Jun 2018) Laura Pidcock: To ask the Secretary of State for Health and Social Care, for what reason age is used as part of the definition of nearest relative under Section 26(3) of the Mental Health Act 1983.  Written Answers — Home Office: Visas: Married People (14 Jun 2018) Laura Pidcock: To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department, for what reason the earnings threshold for the Spouse Visa does not take into account differences in livings costs for different areas in the UK.  Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy: Automotive Industry (12 Jun 2018) Laura Pidcock: Contrary to what the Secretary of State has said, over the past six months nearly 2,000 job losses have been announced in the UK's automotive sector. This week in the media we have seen speculation about thousands of further redundancies caused by a combination of factors, including worries about possible consequences of a no deal Brexit and the absence of the customs union. May I press...  Oral Answers to Questions — Prime Minister: Engagements (6 Jun 2018) Laura Pidcock: Wolsingham school in my constituency has been forced to suspend its sixth form as the result of years of cuts to post-16 education by this ruthless Government and a national funding formula that discriminates against smaller rural communities and their schools. The Education Secretary has washed his hands of the issue. As a result, young people in my community will face four hours or more in...  UK Automotive Industry: Job Losses — [Mr Peter Bone in the Chair] (22 May 2018) Laura Pidcock: I congratulate my hon. Friend the Member for Warwick and Leamington (Matt Western) on securing this important debate. He said that "the headwinds are strong and many" for the automotive sector. He went on to point out 16 issues, including business rates; energy costs; the move from older energies to renewables; the UK's future trading relationship following our withdrawal...  UK Automotive Industry: Job Losses — [Mr Peter Bone in the Chair] (22 May 2018) Laura Pidcock: That is right. I have outlined previously that perhaps some of the confusion and slowness in the process is due to the fact that an initial set of negotiations has to be carried out with two or three Cabinet members before negotiations with the EU can take place. The SMMT says that "neither option currently being considered by government...would provide the frictionless movement of...  Oral Answers to Questions — Treasury: Topical Questions (22 May 2018) Laura Pidcock: Contrary to the out-of-touch outlook presented by the hon. Member for Brigg and Goole (Andrew Percy), Eurostat figures show regional inequality in the UK, measured in output per hour, to
The [Rainmeter] section of Rainmeter.ini defines global options.  SkinPath  Fully qualified path to the skins folder.  ConfigEditor Default: Notepad  Defines the path to the text editor used to edit Rainmeter's configuration files when "Edit Skin" or "Edit Settings" is chosen from the context menu or Manage. Relative paths can be used here, which may be useful for portable installs. Note: This should always be a plain text editing application, and should never be any "word processing" program like Word or Wordpad. More fully-featured alternatives to the default Windows Notepad are discussed at Notepad Alternatives.  TrayIcon Default: 1  Set to 0 to remove the notification area (tray) icon. Note: If all skins are unloaded, the notification area icon will appear, regardless of this setting, in order to avoid a situation where you can't interact with Rainmeter at all.  TrayExecuteM , TrayExecuteR , TrayExecuteDM , TrayExecuteDR  Action to be executed when clicking or double-clicking the Middle or Right mouse buttons on the notification area icon. Left-clicking the icon will always load the Manage dialog. Note: TrayExecuteR will override the context menu that normally appears (hold CTRL and right-click to force context menu).  DesktopWorkArea  Defines the area for maximized windows.   With multiple monitors, use DesktopWorkArea@N (where N is the number of the monitor) to set the work area of a specifc monitor. DesktopWorkArea and DesktopWorkArea@0 both represent the primary monitor.   Note: Moving the taskbar will reset the workarea to Windows' default, as will changing screen resolution.  DesktopWorkAreaType Default: 0  If set to 1 , DesktopWorkArea will be define margins relative to the edges of the screen. Example: With DesktopWorkAreaType=0 and DesktopWorkArea=10,20,600,500 , maximized windows will use an area of 600x500 pixels, which is located 10 pixels from the left and 20 pixels from the top of the screen. With DesktopWorkAreaType=1 and DesktopWorkArea=10,20,30,40 , the area for maximized windows will be 10 pixels from the left, 20 pixels from the top, 30 pixels from the right, and 40 pixels from the bottom of the screen.  Logging Default: 0  If set to 1 , the log will be saved to a file.  Debug Default: 0  If set to 1 , logging will be more verbose. Use Debug=1 only when needed, as it degrades performance.  DisableVersionCheck Default: 0  If set to 1 , checking for new updates will be disabled.  DisableDragging Default: 0  If set to 1 , sets the draggable state of all active skins to prevent dragging skins with the mouse.  SelectedColor Default: 255,0,0,90
Amber Rose is back with more headline-grabbing Instagram posts. After a couple months of keeping things relatively tame, she posted a few new skin-heavy snaps recently. She last caught our attention in May, when she shared topless photo of herself in a pool, but it was nothing compared to the nearly nude photos she took on the beach in Hawaii earlier this year.  Amber has never shied away from sharing images (and videos) of her enviable frame, flawless face, and ridiculously sexy dance moves (while twerking is her specialty, she also does a mean "ass drop"). We've rounded up 23 of Amber's most provocative pictures — keep reading to see them all now.  So here are some of Amber's hottest Instagram pics!  Advertisements
Picture: Getty Images  Australian federal treasurer Scott Morrison has joined the growing chorus of senior politicians around the world who are openly questioning the efficacy of the low rate policies being pursued by central banks around the world.  Morrison told the AFR on the sidelines of the IMF/World Bank meetings in Washington over the weekend that in Australia, monetary policy has "exhausted its effectiveness" and that "its ability to impact and influence is diminishing".  He went further, noting that monetary policy in the current environment is like "pushing on a string".  Morrison was at pains to say that any decision on further rate cuts was one for the "Reserve Bank governor and board" if they think another cut is necessary.  It's worth noting Morrison has a proxy on the board in the form of treasury secretary John Fraser who is likely to be advocating the treasurer's position.  But Morrison's comments echo those of British prime minister Teresa May who last week told a Conservative party conference that "while monetary policy — with super-low interest rates and quantitative easing — provided the necessary emergency medicine after the financial crash, we have to acknowledge there have been some bad side effects".  Those side effects particularly were acknowledged by German finance minister Wolfgang Schaeuble who, like Morrison, warned that central banks are reaching the limits of their effectiveness.  "Monetary policy reaches its limits with negative side effects…becoming more and more visible", Schaeuble said.  Naturally, if politicians are openly questioning the effectiveness of monetary policy, they themselves are undermining it and need to offer an alternative.  In Germany there is growing expectation that Schaeuble will institute billions of dollars in tax cuts, while in the UK, May and her chancellor of the exchequer Philip Hammond have abandoned the deficit reduction plans of former prime minister Cameron and chancellor Osborne.  In Australia however, Morrison has been less concrete, telling the AFR that "what's more important [than further rate cuts] for our economy is getting on with our fiscal consolidation and bringing forward productivity-enhancing reforms".  Clearly Morrison still has deficit reduction as a key plank of his, and the government's strategy. He also believes Australian business needs to play a bigger role in investment, particularly infrastructure.  "We're in a low-interest-rate, low-growth world but we haven't quite yet seen the same calibration of investor expectations on hurdle rates," he said.  That's true.  But in questioning the efficacy of RBA rate cuts, in saying he doesn't think further cuts will do terribly much for the economy, and in offering nothing concrete as an alternative other than fiscal consolidation, the treasurer risks leaving Australia with a policy gap.  Read the full story in the Australian Financial Review.  NOW WATCH: Money & Markets videos  Business Insider Emails & Alerts Site highlights each day to your inbox. Email Address Join  Follow Business Insider Australia on Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, and Instagram.
The Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on Monday issued a statement over the fact that the U.S. and other hostile forces, terrified at the growth of the DPRK's state nuclear force in quality and quantity, are steeped in the most intensive sanctions, pressure and provocations against it.  The statement says:  On August 6, the U.S. framed up "sanctions resolution" 2371 at the United Nations Security Council which is geared to completely block the DPRK's economic development and improvement of the people's livelihood, branding its test-launch of ICBM as "a threat to international peace and security".  This UN "sanctions resolution", to all intents and purposes, is an outcome of diabolical attempts of the U.S. to isolate and stifle the DPRK, which constitutes a flagrant infringement upon its sovereignty and an open challenge to it.  The DPRK's access to the strongest nuclear force is a fair and legitimate measure for self-defense to protect the country's sovereignty and the nation's right to existence from the high-handed and arbitrary acts of the U.S. which has made it its business to pursue the policy of extreme hostility and pose nuclear threat to the DPRK well over half a century.  The successive test-launch of ICBM by the DPRK was a stern warning to the U.S. which, being entrenched far across the Pacific, wages reckless and perilous military provocation and despicable campaign of sanctions on the DPRK.  However, the U.S. goes more frenzied and desperate instead of accepting the DPRK's existence and learning to coexist with the latter. It is trying to drive the situation of the Korean peninsula to the brink of nuclear war, running amuck to conduct missile drill against the DPRK and deploying massive strategic equipment to the peninsula.  It was against this backdrop that the U.S. manipulated UNSC to rig up the "sanctions resolution" more heinous than ever, placing a total ban even on normal trade activities and economic exchange, thereby disclosing before the whole world its evil intention to obliterate the ideology and system of the DPRK and exterminate its people.  On the other hand, the U.S. causes such a racket with no time to wipe their mouth, making impudent remarks that it is considering the so-called military option targeting the DPRK.  There are countries to which the ridiculous threats of the U.S. are working and there are countries which lie prostrate at the bluff of the U.S.  The U.S. claiming to be the "only superpower of the world" and the DPRK's neighbors hardly any smaller in size than the U.S. are all so frightened at merely two ICMB test-launches by the DPRK that they are making much a scene baying at each other. Watching them go frantic only redoubles the DPRK's pride in the country's great might and reaffirms its faith that the path it had chosen is the only way to survive and prosper.  The DPRK has already gained everything it needed while having everything wanted in its hands through an arduous struggle under the harshest sanctions regime created by numerous UN "sanctions resolutions" adopted at the instigation of the U.S during the last several decades. It is only a forlorn hope to consider any chance that the DPRK would be shaken an inch or change its stance by the sanctions of this new kind imposed upon by the hostile forces.  As the U.S. launched full-scale provocation against the DPRK across all fields of politics, economy and military, nothing can alter the will and resolve of the army and people of the DPRK to respond by taking resolute retaliatory measures.  The DPRK Government solemnly states as follows to cope with the grave situation created by the frantic acts of the U.S. and other hostile forces;  First, the DPRK condemns in the strongest terms and totally rejects the anti-DPRK "sanctions resolution" of the UNSC rigged up by the U.S. and other hostile forces as a wanton infringement upon the sovereignty of the country.  The DPRK is taking measures to strengthen the self-defensive nuclear deterrence in order to counter the policy of extreme hostility and nuclear threat against it from the U.S., the biggest nuclear weapons state of the world. Terming these measures "a threat to international peace and security" is a gangster like logic indicating that the rest of the world should either become U.S. colonies serving its interests or fall victim to its aggression.  The countries, that openly pursue their ambition to maintain permanent nuclear hegemony by conducting most of the nuclear tests in the world and launching ICBM  whenever they please, are adopting illegal and unlawful "sanctions resolutions" to incriminate the DPRK's bolstering of self-defensive nuclear force and enforcing those sanctions over its alleged "violation" of them. This constitutes the height of outrageous double standard.  As
A newly-released video attributed to Islamic State (IS, formerly ISIS/ISIL) urges jihadists to stage attacks in Russia. The threat comes amid Russia's repeated warnings that IS terrorism in Syria and Iraq could soon spread to other parts of the world.  While its authenticity could not be confirmed, Reuters reported that the video is thought to have come from the terrorist group's Telegram account.  Read more  A 9-minute subtitled video shows armed militants launching attacks on vehicles and tents, as well as replenishing arms supplies somewhere in the desert. The footage ends with one of the masked militants encouraging the group's supporters to mount attacks on Russian soil, while personally threatening President Vladimir Putin.  READ MORE: Syria-like crises await in Central Asia & Caucasus – Russian defense minister   The alleged IS members did not elaborate on why Russia had been designated as its next "target," however.  The danger posed by the looming return of radicalized IS recruits from Syria, where they went to fight in the jihadists' ranks, was one of the main reasons Russia launched its airstrike campaign against the militants there.  "There are an estimated 5,000 to 7,000 fighters from Russia and other CIS member states fighting for ISIL," Putin said last October after Russia launched its bombing campaign in Syria at the request of Syria's president, Bashar Assad.  Putin: 7,000 people from ex-Soviet republics estimated to fight alongside ISIS http://t.co/zn67NuNnBIpic.twitter.com/iIRtraGH5W — RT (@RT_com) October 16, 2015  "We certainly cannot allow them to use the experience they are getting in Syria on home soil," the president stressed, calling on the creation of a broad international coalition to curb the spread of terrorism.  Russia had largely achieved the stated goals of its operation in Syria by the time Putin ordered the withdrawal of the bulk of Russia's forces in March.  READ MORE: Russian passport found in Syria leads RT to ISIS militant's home (EXCLUSIVE)  Recently, Russia's Defense Minister Sergey Shoigu estimated that some 2,000 fighters hailing from Russia, including 17 warlords, had been killed in the course of the five-month air campaign. Shoigu also warned that the world should brace for a more protracted crises similar to that in Syrian, given the alarming security situation in the world.  "In these circumstances, Russia will be forced to adequately respond to potential threats," he stressed.  READ MORE: Putin orders start of Russian military withdrawal from Syria, says 'objectives achieved'   Afghanistan has become another breeding ground for terrorists close to Russia's borders, posing an immense challenge to the overall security and stability of the Central Asia.  "The Afghan branch of IS is definitely specialized against Central Asia. Russian is even one of their working languages," Zamir Kabulov, head of the Russian Foreign Ministry's Asia and Middle East Department, said back in April, estimating that the number of IS fighters in Afghanistan has increased tenfold since last year.  URGENT: #ISIS claims responsibility for attack on Kabul rally, group's amaq news agency says https://t.co/EF3DIzeeo5 — RT (@RT_com) July 23, 2016  "There are now 10,000 IS fighters in Afghanistan. A year ago there were a hundred," stated the diplomat.  In one of the most violent attacks to rock the Afghan capital recently, a suicide bomber detonated an explosive vest during a mass Shiite demonstration in Kabul, killing 80 people and injuring 23 on July 23. That terrorist act was claimed by Islamic State.
Handout photos released by French police in Paris of Cherif Kouachi, 32, left, and his brother Said, 34. French police A massive manhunt is underway for brothers Said and Cherif Kouachi, the main suspects in a terrorist shooting attack in Paris that killed 12 people on Wednesday.  The brothers have been well known to French authorities for at least a decade and reportedly had known connections to Islamic terrorists.  More is known about Cherif, 32, than Said, 34, but both appear to have jihadist backgrounds.  Both were French nationals of Algerian descent and come from secular backgrounds, according to The New York Times. A French newspaper report cited by The Times said Cherif was raised in foster care in western France and trained to be a fitness instructor before he moved to Paris, where he lived with his brother and a convert to Islam.  Cherif reportedly worked delivering pizzas and as a shop assistant and fishmonger while he lived in France.  He was influenced by the radical Paris mosque preacher Farid Benyettou, the Times report said. Benyettou was known as the spiritual leader of the terror cell "Filiere des Buttes Chaumont," a group that helped funnel fighters into Iraq during the American invasion, according to Bloomberg.  The terror cell's recruits were reportedly going to fight alongside Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, the former Al Qaeda leader in Iraq who was killed in 2006.  REUTERS While they were involved with Benyettou and the terror cell, they reportedly learned how to use automatic weapons like the ones used in Wednesday's attack of the satirical French magazine Charlie Hebdo, which has published cartoons that some Muslims find offensive.  Experts, citing the video of the attack, believe the attackers were professionally trained.  A French magazine cited a police source saying the brothers were "smalltime delinquents who became radicalized,"according to The Telegraph.  Cherif, who has also taken the name Abu Issen, was linked to the cell in 2005 and has been arrested twice in connection with terrorists in France.  He was arrested in 2005 days before he was set to fly to Syria and then to Iraq, The Telegraph reports. In 2008, Cherif was convicted on terrorism charges related to the 2005 case and sentenced to three years in prison with an 18-month suspended sentence.  During his trial, Cherif said he was outraged by images of the torture of Iraqi inmates at the Abu Ghraib prison run by the US in Iraq. He also mentioned wanting to attack Jewish targets in France, according to The Times.  He said he "really believed in the idea" of jihad, according to the Associated Press.  Cherif's lawyer portrayed him as a normal young man who had gone astray and realized the error of his ways, noting that he liked to drink and smoke pot and "wasn't particularly religious," according to a reporter who traveled to Europe to study the threat of Islam for the Pittsburgh Tribune-Review in 2005.  The lawyer said Cherif had been having second thoughts about jihad after his arrest.  But that appeared not to hold.  A screengrab from a video showing Wednesday's attack. Screenshot/Twitter/@Charles_Lister  Cherif's next arrest came in 2010 in connection with the attempted prison escape of former Algerian Armed Islamic Group (GIA) member Smain Ait Ali Belkacem, who had carried out terrorist attacks in France in the 1990s, according to The Telegraph. Said's name also appeared in the police report, and although Cherif was held for four months, neither brother ended up being convicted.  They reportedly traveled to Syria after this, returning last summer, Bloomberg reports.  Cherif is also thought to have ties to French jihadist Djamel Beghal, who spent 10 years in prison for planning terrorist attacks, The Telegraph reports. Cherif and Beghal were thought to have participated in militant training together.  The brothers most recently lived in Gennevilliers, a Paris suburb, according to Bloomberg.
Hiroshi Iuchi, the designer responsible for shooter classics Radiant Silvergun and Ikaruga, is working on an all-new PlayStation 4 shooter for M2, his latest employer.  Iuchi revealed he's been working for M2 for around a year on his personal blog - as picked up and translated by Siliconera. M2's become renowned for its porting work, remastering some of Sega's classics for the 3DS, and Iuchi helped with the port of Afterburner 2.  Ikaruga, Iuchi's most famous work, was recently re-released on Steam.  While his work at Treasure remains his most famous - where he directed the shooters Ikaruga, Radiant Silvergun and Gradius 5 - In recent years Iuchi has been freelancing, as well as working for G.Rev, where he helped on Strania and directed the wonderful Kokuga.  Ubusana is likely a way off, though Iuchi did reveal it'll be a downloadable title for the PlayStation 4, and wouldn't rule out it releasing on other platforms.
Music Theory Welcome Find scales, chords, modes, intervals and other music theory topics quickly and easily, right here. Use the navigation above or the links below to get around the site. Please start with the Topic Overview links below if it's your first visit.  Top 1. Site introduction This section describes how basicmusictheory.com is structured, and how to use it. Most music theory sites describe each topic (scales, modes etc.) then provide simple examples in one key. basicmusictheory.com works the other way around - it describes music theory within the context of a specific key. So for example, to learn how any major scale is constructed, you can click on any of the major scale links above - they all contain the same core content describing how the scale is constructed. But to learn how the major scale is constructed for specific key, click specifically on that link eg. C major scale, which will show the scale construction, and note names specifically for that key. To get started, the topic introduction sections below highlight the simplest and most complex keys to learn. Nearly all the pages on this site start with the diagram shown above, from B to C. The second note always has a orange line underneath it, indicating middle C / midi note 60, on the piano. When middle C is used in bass and treble clef diagrams, it is also shown with a orange bar through the note. This convention is unique to this site, and has been done to make clear which notes the audio (midi/mp3) files contain, in relation to the piano and clef diagrams. This blank piano diagram is the starting step from which all topics begin.. notes, scales, modes, chords, everything. Each topic has a number of steps, each of which adds a layer of construction detail onto that diagram until the topic is complete, and the final note names are shown. Examples of completed diagrams for each topic are shown in the topic introduction sections below.  Top 3. Chromatic scale This page shows an example of a chromatic scale using all piano keys between the tonic and the octave. 1 octave - 12 notes Chromatic scales contain 12 notes, and include every note including the starting tonic note highlighted as the first blue note below. All white and black keys are used. The 13th note (also in blue) is the same note name as the tonic note, but is 1 octave higher, and has twice the frequency of note 1. So note 1 - E-flat above middle C has a frequency of 329.63 Hz, and note 13 is (2 x 329.63) = 659.26 Hz. The next E-flat (which would be shown as note 26) has twice the frequency again - 1318.51, and so on. The Eb chromatic scale shows the E-flat chromatic scale above. Chromatic scale naming in the context of a key signature If chromatic scale notes are being used and identified within the context of a scale with a key signature (eg. major scale, or any minor scale), then the key signature will be the guide as to whether to use sharps or flats for the chromatic scale. For example, if a sharp-based key signature is used, eg. G major key signature, and we want to use the chromatic scale to identify notes outside that scale, sharps would be used for those chromatic scale notes. The same principle applies to flat-based key signatures, eg. Eb major key signature, where flat note names would be used. Chromatic scales without a key signature For both C major key signature and A natural minor key signature, there are no sharp or flat notes, so since there is no key signature, we have no clue as to whether to use sharp or flat names to identify any non-natural notes. Although there seem to be no generally agreed rules on how to handle this, one common music theory convention is to use sharps when ascending the scale ie. when playing the notes from lowest to the highest pitch, then use flats when descending.  Top 4. Major scale This page shows an overview of the structure of the major scale, with examples. Structure Major scales contain 7 notes, and all use the W-W-H-W-W-W-H tone / half-tone pattern to identify the note positions. The first note in the diagram below (*) is the tonic note, from which the counting pattern begins. To count up a Whole tone, count up by two physical piano keys, either white or black. To count up a Half-tone (semitone), count up from the last note up by one physical piano key, either white or black. So in the example below, we are interested in the major scale in the key of E-flat. No matter which key name (or color - black / white) a major scale starts on, the same pattern above is used. The 8th and final note in the diagram is
Directory: Characters → Dragon Team Support  "It's the unpredictable nature of this game that attracts me. That...and of course the money."  — "The Mysterious Fifth Man"  Fortuneteller Baba (占いババ, Uranai Baba, lit. "Fortune-telling Crone") is an old witch and the older sister of Master Roshi who appears for the first time in the Commander Red Saga in a vision, as Goku was seeing the past, present, and future on Korin Tower. She appeared full-time in the Fortuneteller Baba Saga in Dragon Ball, and after that she shows up in anime fillers and rarely from time to time.  Contents show]  Appearance  Baba has a very old and weathered appearance. She is short enough that her body can neatly fit on top of the Glass Ball that she uses to move around on. Her clothing is similar to that of the generic witches, with a tall pointed hat and a dark one piece gown.  Personality  Baba is shown to be very rude towards people, even her own brother. Baba also likes to underestimate people who fight her five warriors, as she thought that Goku, Yamcha and Krillin stood no chance of beating any of them. She seems to have her limits on just how far she will let the fighters do to their opponents, urgently ordering Spike the Devil Man not to attack Goku with the Devilmite Beam, assuming it would kill him like all its other victims. Another example of her arrogance is evident when she informs Grand Kai that she will take Goku to the living world without the Kai's consent, and even dared to say to his face that she did not need it to do such a thing, much to the deity's displeasure (though he is forced to consent anyway because, as noticed by Baba, he would have to train Goku himself if he refused).  Biography  Background  Baba has been fortune-telling for more than 500 years, and is none other than Master Roshi's older sister, whom he bickers with constantly. With her unique clairvoyant capabilities, she is able to see into the future using her Crystal Ball. She is more than happy to tell anyone what their future holds for them, although the price is very costly with a payment up front of Ƶ10,000,000.  Dragon Ball  Fortuneteller Baba Saga  Main article: Fortuneteller Baba Saga  However, the alternative way of gaining one's fortune is to defeat her five "other-worldly" martial arts experts, Fangs the Vampire, See-Through the Invisible Man, Bandages the Mummy, Spike the Devil Man, and Grandpa Gohan at her palace. Goku, Krillin and Yamcha take her challenge when they cannot find the last Dragon Ball to resurrect Bora, a man killed when helping Goku. Baba herself assisted See Through when Yamcha could hear his movements, by singing loudly, so Yamcha had no idea where he was. Eventually, they beat all five warriors, with the last one giving up. She has a knack for divination skills with her Crystal Ball, allowing her to see any place on Earth, or even look deep into the future. She can also travel to the Other World and back. During the fights with her martial experts in Dragon Ball, it is made known that she has the ability to grant special leave for the dead to return for approximately one day, which she uses to let Goku fight his own dead adoptive Grandpa Gohan.  Dragon Ball Z  Saiyan Saga  Main article: Vegeta Saga  In Dragon Ball Z, Baba meets the Guide who took Goku to the start of the Snake Way in a café in the Other World. The Guide gives her Goku's message for Master Roshi (which reaches him via Kami and Yajirobe). In one anime filler of the Vegeta Saga, the television coverage of the Saiyan fight is interrupted while Fortuneteller Baba arrives there (upon her arrival she is greeted by a wave of stray bullets having been fired by an impulsive Chi-Chi, who was being restrained from going to the battlefield to take her son home).  Master Roshi, Bulma, Chi-Chi, Ox-King, Oolong, and Puar gather around her crystal ball to see how their friends and loved ones are faring, but her magical ball eventually phases out due to the large concentrations of energy.  Cell Saga  Main article: Cell Games Saga In another anime filler scene, she went to Goku's house to show Chi-Chi and the Ox-King the conclusion of the Cell Games on her crystal ball.  Majin Buu Saga  Main articles: World Tournament Saga and Fusion Saga  Later on, she allows Goku to return to Earth for one day to participate in the World Martial Arts
Line-up /  Duke Dumont, The Magician  Quality music is born from the soul but gifted life through the gathering of like-minded people on the dance floor, giving wings to friendship and feelings to thought. Every Saturday at Exchange LA, good music and good memories bloom. This is the Inception of something beautiful.   Saturday, November 1st, Inception presents Duke Dumont and The Magician.   For bottle service information, birthday specials and more, please call (213) 444-3388 or email [email protected]   Dress code strictly enforced. For more info, please visit www.exchangela.com
The remnants of Tropical Storm Lee moved northward from the southern Appalachians on the 6th to the middle Atlantic states on the 7th before stalling on the 8th. The moisture from Lee interacted with a frontal system to the west across the eastern Ohio Valley and eastern Great Lakes. In addition, moisture was drawn into New York and Pennsylvania from Hurricane Katia which was moving northward off the east coast in tandem with the remnants of Lee. This complicated scenario led to an extreme amount of rain for central New York and northeast Pennsylvania, most of which fell over a 48 hour period from the 6th to the 8th. Rainfall of 6 to 12 inches occurred over most of the upper Susquehanna river basin in New York and northeast Pennsylvania. The heavy rain caused massive, record breaking flooding on small streams, creeks and the Susquehanna River and its larger tributaries.  The main branch of the Susquehanna River in New York from Binghamton to Vestal, Owego and Waverly crested from 1 to 4 feet higher than the previous record crests set in June 2006. In Pennsylvania, record crests occurred along the Susquehanna River at Meshoppen and Wilkes Barre which exceeded the long-standing record crests by around 1 foot associated with Hurricane Agnes in 1972.  Damages in the upper Susquehanna River Basin in New York and Pennsylvania are close to 1 billion dollars. Unfortunately, the flooding claimed 1 life and injured 1 person in central New York and northeast Pennsylvania.
https://github.com/chriskmanx/qmole  Subscribe to Newsletter to be kept up-to-date.   Commercial users: Don't want to re-implement Linux software on iOS? QMole is the answer. QMole is a new desktop system allowing the free operation of software ported from the world of Linux on the iPad. If you have any questions, please feel free to contact  sales@qmole.uk
A new report states that only 36 percent of Indian software engineers can write working, compilable code based on a test used to automatically grade programming skills.  The report was published by Aspiring Minds, an Indian skills assessment company, which based their report on a sample of 36,800 people from more than 500 colleges across India. The company used an automated tool called Automata to perform the study. Automata is a 60-minute test that is taken in a compiler integrated environment that rates candidates on a number of levels including programming ability, programming practices, run-time complexity, and test case coverage. Candidates in the test were made up of 61.1 percent male candidates and 38.9 percent female candidates, coming from cities such as Delhi, Chennai, Mumbai, and Hyderabad.  Automata utilizes advanced artificial intelligence technology to automatically analyze and grade a candidates coding abilities. The study states, "We find that out of the two problems given per candidate, only 14 percent of engineers were able to write compilable codes for both and only 22 percent were able to write compilable code for exactly one problem." The test also found that of all the subjects tested, only 14.67 percent would be employable by a modern IT firm. When testing for candidates that could write fully functional code using the best practices and methods, only 2.21 percent passed the test.  "Functionally correct code is the basic requisite of a good programmer. However, to enhance the quality of the code, a few more important indicators have emerged — efficiency, time complexity and space complexity," the study said, "Nothing is more time-consuming than dealing with badly written code which leads to enormous bugs and exceptions. The analysis unveils that only 2.21 percent of engineers possess the skillset to write logically correct code with best efficiency and least time-space complexity."  The full report from Aspiring Minds can be found here.
'Kabali' Actor Sai Dhansika Was Slut-Shamed & Insulted by Her Co-Star on Stage & No One Did a Thing  Toxic masculinity is a given in any film industry.   Down South, things are much worse as shown by Kollywood actor T Rajendra after he humiliated his 'Vizhithiru' co-star Dhansika as 'revenge' because she forgot to thank him earlier while addressing the press.   He berated her continuously, by questioning her choice of wardrobe - "You haven't come dressed in a saree and you are saying sorry."   Image Source  He even mocked her by saying - "I am not going to earn my livelihood through the recognition you give me."   I'm really obliged to d no of ppl 4showing their care and luv 4 me, for what happened to me. But it is a pity, this is state of lone women.. — SaiDhanshika (@SaiDhanshika) September 29, 2017   The female actor had apparently forgotten to acknowledge Rajendra, who was in no mood to forgive and decided to publicly humiliate his colleague and went on to do so for the rest of the press conference.  The actress seemed profusely apologetic about the oversight, while her other colleagues were seen enjoying the director's tirade.  You can watch the whole video here:  Just another day in the life of a female actor in a male-dominated industry?  After the incident went viral, some took to Twitter to express their support to the actor.   But please don't ignore this. You can stay strong and focus as others say, but demand an apology. We are with you. — Chezhiyan (@WhatteyKarvad) September 29, 2017   What happened to you was absurd! A total bullying incident. I wonder why no one interrupt and stop him?! And why are they laughing ? — Pravin Snow (@PravinVejan) September 29, 2017   Absolutely, y those colleagues of her kept laughing!Those r the one whom manners to be taught,Dhanshika we know is a well behaved human! — SriKannan (@SriKannna) September 29, 2017   The colleague continued to teach 'manners' to Dhansika and has not issued an apology yet.
Fan favorite Munenori Kawasaki  hit his first minor league home run on August 18, 2016, after nearly 800 plate appearances.  He was so excited he almost lapped John Andreoli near the end of his trot. Kawasaki is expected to be back with the Cubs once the rosters expand in September but has had a hard time cracking the 25-man roster this season.  He has appeared in only three games for the Cubs this year, including this pinch hitting assignment in the home opener: Hopefully, we will see Muni, his new-found power and winning personality back with the big club soon.  Omedetoo Gozaimasu!
173 votes  "Merry-go-round"  Shinichi and Satomi visit an amusement park in a mall, and a clown invites them to ride the merry-go-round. Shinichi opts to watch while Satomi rides, and he notices that the other kids on the ride don't seem to be having much fun... ... more
Tennis at Atdhe  Are you ready for tennis at Atdhe? I'm sure you are, bucause why would you be at the best live streaming site in the world, right? Okay here we go. Take a seat and listen me now really carefuly, because I'm going to tell you what you have to do to watch tennis live streams at Goatd. Ready? The first thing you need to do is just sit down and watch. And the second thing is that there is no second thing. Yep, exactly, tennis live streams at Atdhe are that simple to wach!
RICHMOND, Va. – The Richmond Kickers announced on Wednesday it had acquired five players on loan from the club's official Major League Soccer partner, D.C. United, with U.S. U17 international Chris Durkin returning to Richmond for a second consecutive year.  Forward Alhaji Kamara, goalkeeper Eric Klenofsky, midfielder Chris Odoi-Atsem and midfielder Maxim Tissot were also sent on loan to Richmond throughout the 2017 season, pending league and federation approval.  Durkin signed a Homegrown contract with D.C. United last year, becoming the youngest Homegrown Player in club history. He made his D.C. debut as a 16-year-old when he started United's Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup Fourth Round match in June, and went on to make three appearances with the Kickers in 2016.  A native of Glen Allen, Va., Durkin joined the Richmond Kickers Youth Soccer Club at the age of 8. Splitting time between the Richmond United Academy and D.C. United Academy, the Captain of the U17 U.S. Men's National Team trained with the Kickers pro team during the 2015 season and featured in the exhibition match against the English Premier League's West Bromwich Albion as a 15-year old before earning an invitation to U.S. Soccer's residency program at IMG Academy in Bradenton, Fla. in January 2016.
Former Germany captain Lothar Matthaeus has claimed that Nuernberg attacker Josip Drmic will join Arsenal in the summer, although the player himself has dismissed the comments as speculation.  Josip Drmic has hit 16 goals in the Bundesliga this season.  • McNicholas: Need for speed  Drmic, 21, has proved to be one of the surprise hits in the Bundesliga this season, having hit 16 goals -- the same amount as Borussia Dortmund's Robert Lewandowski, and only one less than Bayern Munich's Mario Mandzukic, who currently tops the scoring charts.  Nuernberg, however, are struggling to maintain their top-flight status, and have already conceded that there will be no way to keep hold of the Switzerland international should they get relegated. Should they finish the season in the drop zone, a five million euro release clause would be triggered.  Nuernberg say they are determined to keep hold of Drmic should they stay up, but according to Matthaeus, the striker has already decided to join Arsenal instead.  "Drmic is linked to Arsenal. I know that his wife is already looking for a flat in London," Matthaeus told Sky Deutschland on Saturday. "I'd like to think that he will successfully finish the season at Nuernberg and then will be sold at a profit. Address: Arsenal, London."  Drmic was rather surprised when told of Matthaeus' claims on Saturday, however.  "I am single right now. And there is no-one looking for a flat in London," he told Bild.  But speaking to Sky Deutschland, he did not entirely rule out a move to Arsenal further down the line.  "What the future will bring, I don't know. Every lad dreams of joining Arsenal," Drmic said.  On Monday, though, Matthaeus insisted that his sources were correct, and would not backtrack on his comments.  "Drmic will join Arsenal for eight million pounds," he told Bild. "It's a fact that there is a woman, and I know her name, looking for a flat. I was right with [Robert] Lewandowski and [Adrian] Ramos [whose transfers he predicted on Sky Deutschland]. And I will be proved right again."  Drmic's agent Volker Struth, however, also moved to deny Matthaeus' claims, telling Bild: "This speculation is far-fetched."
Tony Abbott gave Rupert Murdoch a "full rundown" on his planned paid parental leave scheme before announcing the policy in 2010, in a marked contrast with his decision not to consult the party room, a new book reveals.   The then-opposition leader's discussions with the News Corp boss are outlined in a book published on Wednesday about the treasurer, Joe Hockey, by the former News Corp columnist Madonna King.  The release of the authorised biography came a day after the Productivity Commission issued a report that suggested some of the $5.5bn earmarked for the paid parental leave policy should be diverted to childcare to make a bigger impact on workforce participation.  The plan to provide six months of paid parental leave at the full replacement wage is opposed by large parts of the Coalition party room and is yet to be legislated.  In the book, King reveals Murdoch was consulted before Abbott announced the policy – including a levy on big business – on International Women's Day in March 2010.  "Big business rumbled but didn't erupt at the scheme, but the party room was in uproar," King writes.  "The hardheads knew that it would open the Coalition up to an accusation of raising taxes even though the extra tax would only apply to big businesses. But, more importantly, neither the party room nor the businesses who would pay had been consulted.  "Abbott, however, had conferred with one leading business figure, the media proprietor Rupert Murdoch, who had been in Australia the month before for his mother's 101st birthday …  "The new leader, like many before him, had dinner with Murdoch, where he gave the media mogul a full rundown on the scheme – supplying enough detail for Murdoch to later have his Australian-based editors briefed on Abbott's plan, which he considered a visionary approach to dealing with a real problem in his workforce. They were encouraged to support it, notwithstanding that it represented a tax impost and was skewed to be of most benefit to parents outside their middle-Australian readership.  "This fact was unknown to members in the party room, who condemned Abbott's solo policy-making on such a fundamental issue."  The book says Abbott had alerted Hockey to the parental leave plan "but Joe recalls the subject as a brief add-on in a telephone conversation, with no specific date or details attached".  Abbott told King that Hockey was "one of the very few colleagues whom I discussed the paid parental leave proposal with". Abbott said Hockey saw merit in it, even if he did not "enthusiastically" support it. Abbott subsequently told the party room he had made the decision as leader.  Hockey told King he and Abbott subsequently "had a heart to heart" about the process, leading them to pledge to work more closely with each other.  The Coalition has repeatedly been forced to defend its paid parental leave scheme, which it argues should be considered a workplace entitlement rather than a welfare payment. Numerous Coalition backbenchers have spoken out against it in light of the budget position.  Hockey told the ABC on Tuesday: "I'm very mindful again that we have in fact gone to two elections with a commitment to a paid parental leave scheme and, again, I say we are asking everyone to respect the mandate that we got from the Australian people to deliver our policies. It is not one election, it is two, so there is a pretty compelling argument for us to be very true to our word and deliver a paid parental leave scheme."  The book, Hockey: Not Your Average Joe, provides details of Hockey's early life, his rise to the role of treasurer, and his first budget.  It says the budget – key measures of which are unpopular and are unlikely to pass through the Senate – was "much softer" than Hockey would have liked but Abbott "was taking a much more cautious approach".  The shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen, seized on this account on Wednesday, saying the "revelation in this book that Joe Hockey actually wanted to go further in the cuts in the budget is a stark reminder of just how out of touch Australia's treasurer is".  Bowen also said it was "extraordinary" for the prime minister's chief of staff, Peta Credlin, to name potential successors to Abbott.  In the book, Credlin says both Abbott and Hockey are keen not to fall into the John Howard-Peter Costello competitive dichotomy.  "Joe's absolutely a contender and he's probably got his head above every other contender, but I think we're a long way away from saying he's an heir apparent – and he'd say that, too," Credlin says.  The book also tells of a curious incident during Hockey's time at university that prompted his decision to enter student politics, beginning a chain of events that led to his federal political career.  It says that Hockey as a young child told "everyone who would listen that he wanted to be prime
Deep into Belgium's Forêt d'Orval two brave brewmasters—Orval's first female brewmaster Anne-Françoise Pypaert and New Belgium's Peter Bouckaert—crafted Spiced Dark Strong Ale. They brought spruce tips and medium-toasted American oak to this brooding chocolaty beer, and then wove deeply herbal French Sprisselspalt and spicy Liberty and Willamette hops into the mix. A dash of grains of paradise offers a beam of citrusy light. Show Less
Conservative backbencher Douglas Carswell is joining forces with Green MP Caroline Lucas in a bid to give voters the option of proportional representation in May's electoral reform referendum.  At the moment, there will only be one option on the ballot paper - the Alternative Vote system.  But Mr Carswell says this will make MPs less representative than they are now.  He said he planned to move a series of amendments in the Commons next week, with Caroline Lucas, to the Electoral Reform Bill currently making its way through Parliament, to give voters the "fullest range of options possible" in the referendum.  Speaking at a fringe meeting at the Conservative Party conference in Birmingham, Mr Carswell said: "Those of us who believe in far reaching political reform should vote no to AV."  He argued that AV, under which voters rank candidates in order of preference, would "insulate many politicians from their voters" because candidates would be able to "ignore" the views of those who did not support them, safe in the knowledge that they would get second or third preference votes.  Ireland  He said it was "a reform that was picked by politicians trying to cobble together a coalition in order to gain power" and it would "guarantee that we move to an even more bland and generic way of doing politics".  The Lib Dems demanded a referendum on AV as part of their power sharing deal with the Conservatives, even though most Tories favour the current first-past-post system and the party leadership will campaign to keep it.  Mr Carswell is unusual among his backbench Conservative colleagues in campaigning for a more proportional voting system, arguing in favour of the single, transferable vote system like the one used in Ireland.  Constituencies would have three MPs and each voter would get one vote, which can transfer from their first preference to their second preference and so on, as necessary.  Ms Lucas also backs more proportional voting, either with the single transferable vote system (STV) or the additional member system (AMS), under which MPs from a party list are added to their total to reflect the share of their vote.  The amendment worked out between Ms Lucas and Mr Carswell, says voters should be asked if they want to keep the status quo, and if not which of four voting systems would they prefer - AV, STV, AMS or AV Plus, where top-up seats are allocated in line with a party's share of the vote.  'Knaves and charlatans'  Mr Carswell said he hoped to attract support from "centre left" MPs and Lib Dems, who want electoral reform but are against AV.  Conservative MEP Daniel Hannan also spoke out against AV at the meeting, saying those who were campaigning for it risked appearing "knaves and charlatans" and he accused the Electoral Reform Society of "risking making utter fools of themselves" after spending so many years campaigning for proportional representation.  He said there was a case for PR but the most important changes were open primaries to select election candidates and more referendums.  Peter Facey, of Unlock Democracy, one of the leading campaigners for AV, was one of three people on the seven strong panel to argue in favour of the system, saying voters deserved more choice.  Author Peter Stafford also made an impassioned argument for AV, saying British democracy was "broken, bankrupt, it is not fair and it is time for it to change".  David Campbell-Bannerman, deputy leader of the UK Independence Party, who was in the audience at the Freedom Zone fringe meeting, said he had persuaded Conservative MP Philip Hollobone to table an amendment calling for voters to be asked if they want AV Plus, which he believes is fairer.
China has shut more than 100 golf courses in the last five years amid a campaign against a sport which has been vilified by Beijing's Communist rulers but enjoyed by local officials.  The building of golf courses was banned in China in 2004, but demand from the growing ranks of wealthy and local-level cadres has seen numbers rocket from fewer than 200 to 683 over that time.  A total of 111 golf courses were "outlawed" after they were found to have been using large amounts of land and water, according to China's top planner, the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC).  Another 18 golf courses have been ordered to return and restore illegally occupied land, and 47 told to cease construction or business activities.  The remaining 507 golf courses were instructed to carry out "rectification", while 11 voluntarily closed, the NDRC said.  The developers of the golf courses were found to have been using large amounts of arable land or nature reserve areas, or extracting groundwater illegally, it said.
New Reality Kings Porn Videos 11,551  Recent Most Viewed Top Rated Title All Time This Week This Month This Year All Sites 40 Inch Plus 8th Street Latinas Bad Tow Truck Big Naturals Big Tits Boss Bikini Crashers CFNM Secret Captain Stabbin Cum Fiesta Cum Girls Dangerous Dongs Euro Sex Parties Extreme Asses Extreme Naturals First Time Auditions Flower Tucci Girls of Naked HD Love Happy Tugs Hot Bush In the VIP Mike in Brazil Mike's Apartment Milf Hunter Milf Next Door Moms Bang Teens Moms Lick Teens Money Talks Monster Curves No Faces Pure 18 RK Prime Real Orgasms Round and Brown Saturday Night Latinas See My Wife Sneaky Sex Street BlowJobs Team Squirt Teens Love Huge Cocks Top Shelf Pussy Tranny Surprise VIP Crew We Live Together Wives in Pantyhose
According to news from Belgrade, Serbia wants to participate in the implementation of the "Turkish Stream" gas pipeline project. According to the country's Minister of Foreign Affairs Ivica Dacic, "Europe cannot do without Russian gas." Recent violence in nearby Macedonia accentuates an energy transit competition of an unparalleled dynamic, a virtual economic war over gas.  News Greece and Russia are negotiating strategies to implement the extension of the new natural gas stream via Turkey through Greece, and news of conflict in Macedonia this week has sparked interest in the great EU gas supply competition seen as causing much of the region's turmoil. Now, according to Dacic via a press conference following meetings with Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov, "Serbia is interested in participating in the whole process."  Sergey Lavrov met with First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Serbia Ivica Dačić  The Serbian minister went on to urge the EU to "be more clear" in its opinions and goals where the new gas stream implementation is concerned. The statement alludes to the complaint from some that the United States and other influences are taking advantage of the European Union's lack of a clearer strategy on Russia gas imports.  Earlier this week, President of Serbia Tomislav Nikolic clarified his country's position with regard to the "Turkish stream". During his visit to Moscow the Serbian president first discussed the difficulties of the project for Serbia, even contending that Serbia playing a role might be impossible. He later modified his statement, deferring to an EU decision on some of the matters involved.  Meanwhile, on the issue of the recent attacks in Macedonia, Russia's Lavrov spoke from Belgrade:  "We can't judge with final certainty, but objectively it seems that the events in Macedonia are developing on the back of the failure of the Macedonian government to adhere to the policy of sanctions against Russia."  The Russian minister went on to say that Skopje's positive attitude toward the new "Turkish Stream" might also bear on the recent acts of violence, as many in Brussels and further abroad are opposed to any such cooperation. This article on Sputnik International frames the new tensions in Macedonia as a re-ignition of Kosovo War emotions for a purpose.  It seems clear geographically at least, that a dangerous game of energy blocking might be going on as experts assess what is theorized as a Greater Albania expansionism, which Moscow seems to believe is a destabilization process orchestrated by Western adversaries in the energy realm. The recent Ukraine crisis, and past conflicts in between Georgia and Russia and in the Caucasus are widely accepted as energy related flash points. Some would contend that every attempt is being made to disrupt the flow of Russian energy supplies westward. Dusan Prorokovic, an expert in Balkan affairs told Sputnik:  "The concept of Greater Albania is once again relevant but it won't see any progress without the help of the North Atlantic bloc. I think why all of that happened is more linked to the "Turkish stream" and the defeat of the US in Ukraine, than to local Albanian interests."  Looking at the situation from the Russian perspective, it's clear that a ring of conflict has sprung up encircling the world's largest natural resource reserve. One has to wonder what kind of strategies are in play to curtail Russian energy economics, since obviously the status quo would have been the best economic move for the Russians. If there is a plan behind all this, the instigators of these conflicts (be they energy related) apparently are opposed to stable Russian gas flows through these regions. In the end the "coincidences" will dissipate, revealing what might be a new type of economic war.
Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte attends a meeting with Russian President Vladimir Putin at the Kremlin in Moscow, Russia, May 23, 2017. REUTERS/Maxim Shemetov  By Romeo Ranoco  PANTAR, Philippines (Reuters) - Thousands of civilians fled fighting in the Philippines on Wednesday as troops tried to fend off Islamist militants who took over large parts of a city, capturing Christians, seizing and torching buildings and setting free scores of prisoners.  Islamic State claimed responsibility for the rampage via its Amaq news agency, and President Rodrigo Duterte defended his decision to declare martial law on Mindanao, the Muslim-majority island where Marawi City is located, to prevent the spread of extremism in the impoverished region.  The violence flared in Marawi on Tuesday afternoon after a botched raid by security forces on a hideout of the Maute, a militant group that has pledged allegiance to Islamic State.  Fighters quickly dispersed, torching buildings and taking over bridges, a hospital, two jails, a church and a college. Duterte said he heard reports they may have beheaded a police chief.  He said Islamic State must be repelled from the Christian-majority Philippines and he would use all means possible to crush the Maute group and the allied Abu Sayyaf, whatever the consequences.  "Anyone now holding a gun, confronting government with violence, my orders are spare no one, let us solve the problems of Mindanao once and for all," said Duterte, who is from the island, after cutting short a visit to Russia and returning to Manila.  "If I think you should die, you will die. If you fight us, you will die. If there's an open defiance, you will die, and if it means many people dying, so be it. That's how it is."  Soldiers and guerrillas set up rival checkpoints and roadblocks on routes in and around Marawi as civilians fled the city of 200,000 in droves, leaving behind what one official described as a ghost town.  Long queues of pickup trucks and jeeps crammed full of people and loaded with belongings crawled along roads into nearby towns as troops searched vehicles for weapons and bombs.  The military said it had rescued 120 people from a school and a hospital and was trying to isolate Maute fighters while awaiting reinforcements that were being blocked by rebels.  Maute snipers and booby traps were hampering operations, which the army said could last three more days.  HUMAN SHIELDS  The Catholic church said militants were using Christians and a priest as human shields and had contacted cardinals with threats to execute hostages unless government troops withdrew.  Thirteen militants and seven security personnel have so far been killed and 33 troops wounded, the army said.  Mujiv Hataman, governor of the Autonomous Region in Mindanao, said militants freed 107 prisoners, among them Maute rebels.  Duterte said martial law would mean checkpoints and arrests and searches without warrant, and it would go on for as long as necessary.  He said he would consider some security measures in the central Visayas region next to Mindanao to facilitate arrests, and could even declare martial law nationwide. He was furious that militants had hoisted the Islamic State flag in Marawi.  "I made a projection, not a prediction, that one of these days the hardest things to deal with would be the arrival of ISIS," Duterte said, referring to Islamic State.  "The government must put an end to this. I cannot gamble with ISIS because they are everywhere."  Duterte said he would not tolerate abuses of power by security forces under martial law, but critics said the military rule in all of Mindanao, an island the size of South Korea with a population of 22 million, was an overreaction.  The National Union of Peoples' Lawyers, a group of human rights attorneys, called it "a sledgehammer, knee-jerk reaction" that would "open the flood gates for unbridled human rights violations".  The military has not explained how the raid on an apartment hideout went so badly wrong. The operation was aimed at capturing Isnilon Hapilon, a leader of the Abu Sayyaf group notorious for piracy, banditry and for kidnapping and decapitating Westerners.  The Maute and Abu Sayyaf have proved fierce opponents for the military.  The armed forces said they were on top of the situation but residents who fled told a different story.  "The city is still under the control of the armed group. They are all over the main roads and two bridges leading to Marawi," student Rabani Mautum told Reuters in Pantar town, about 16 km (10 miles) away.  Bishops and cardinals urged Islamic leaders to persuade militants to free innocent hostages.  "We beg every Filipino to pray fervently," said Father Socrates
Make Your Virtual Dreams A Reality — Introducing the Manila Vive Jam  This January 16–17, VR Philippines would be hosting the Manila Vive Jam — a virtual reality game jam that will bring together brilliant minds to learn and collaborate on creating immersive virtual reality applications and experiences using room-scale tracking and natural input technology that is made possible with the HTC Vive and SteamVR platform.  The Vive is Valve and HTC's Virtual Reality solution that allows users to experience fully immersive games and experiences. It runs on Valve' SteamVR software platform.  What makes the Vive miles ahead of other VR devices is that it is capable of room-scale tracking through its lighthouse technology, which means that users can walk freely around a 4.5mx4.5m space and fully interact naturally with the virtual environment using the two tracked controllers.  For an idea of what the Vive feels like, take a look at the reaction of people in this video from the pre-event meetup and demos we held last December:  Developers and designers of varying skill levels, from students to professional game developers, are all invited to participate either as a team or individually. As long as you have a basic knowledge of either Unity or Unreal game development engines, and the passion to turn your virtual dreams into reality, you're pretty much qualified for the event.  Registered jammers will get meals for the 2-day jam, an event shirt, lots of cool freebies, and access to one of the only two Vive development kits in the Philippines.  The Vive Jam is not a competition but rather an event where developers will have a chance to learn and develop on the hottest VR platform around. The jam is in the spirit of learning and collaboration, on making cool stuff and sharing ideas and best practices and having fun with this cool new tech.  All teams that will join this event will have a chance to get their hands on their own HTC Vive development kit as we will showcase all of the content developed for the jam and help each one reach out to Valve and HTC to request their own kits to continue their development.  If you are interested in joining the Manila Vive Jam, you can now register on the official event page!  On the afternoon of the second day, January 17th, there will be show and tell presentations and demo sessions where attendees can try out the VR experiences developed during the jam. If you are interested in attending the demo day, you may also register on the official event page.  The second day will also be the premiere of the first 360 documentary shot in the Philippines, Happyland360. We will be setting up Gear VRs for attendees to watch it in 360.
From CHiPs Wiki  Bikes on a trailer for filming  Harley Davidson  Note that the engine was taken out  Erik and his bike  BMW R1100RT-P  Motor officers in "CHiPs" ride Kawasaki Z1-P & KZ900-C2 in seasons 1 & 2 and KZ1000-C1 from season 3. Ponch almost won the street model (a 1978 Kawasaki Z1-R) on a game show in "Name Your Price". Producers used the same trailer for filming in season 3 as they did in the first two seasons. The bikes on the trailer were still KZ-900. Because the difference would be visible, they removed the KZ900-C2 windscreen and put a KZ1000-C1 windscreen on the bikes but they forgot to replace the pursuit lights (they are bigger on the KZ900) and the metal frame below the headlight (missing on the KZ900-C2).  In mid '70s CHP tested other motorcylces such as Moto Guzzi Eldorado, Honda 750 four and Suzuki 850 (this last one can be seen in the background at Central parking lot in many episodes of the second season), all those motors looked really similar because of the Department specifics such as saddle bags, radio box and pursuit lights, so it is not easy to spot the differences. In "The Matchmakers" a CHP veteran still rides a Harley Davidson. In "CHiPs '99", the chippies ride new BMW R1100RT-P motorcycles. Erik Estrada owns one of the KZ1000-C1 used in the series.
I've asked around at work and done some research online too, and I saw that there are set procedures that outline what to do when an employee leaves a company. However, there's no checklist that tells social media managers what to do when one of their employees/colleagues suddenly leaves. On a good case scenario, the departure is amicable and nothing else happens.  However, due to circumstances, these departures aren't always amicable...  These are just a couple of examples of what can happen are some of the most memorable ones. However,this seems to be happening too often for it to be left unnoticed by other social media managers.  So, here's a checklist you can use if anyone who's dealt with your social presence leaves your company/brand:  Change the passwords to your social accounts: while this is self-explanatory, the fact that there are more and more cases of (ex) employees easily hacking social accounts after they've left their companies clearly shows that this easy step is still ignored by many. Change the passwords to the emails that belong to your social accounts: even if you change the passwords to your social accounts, it's easy to reset your password if someone has access to the associated email address = all you need is just a click on "forgot/reset password". Change passwords to any social tool: whether you're using Hootsuite, SproutSocial, Adobe Social or any other social tool - if it's linked to any of your social profiles, change the tool's password. These tools can be used to access your social profiles without having to log in to those profiles. Do the same for other social tools, e.g. analytics tools. Unless you're comfortable with the thought of personal stats related to your social profiles being outed online (e.g. how much you're spending for ads, your reach), change the password for those tools. Revoke access from any social tool: some social profiles allow you to link your personal profile to a brand page. For example, before you can manage your Facebook Page, you need to link it to your Facebook Profile. Make sure that you revoke access to any social accounts that work in the same way. Don't use the same passwords for all your accounts: use a password generator if need be. There are several resources out there (free and paid) that can help you with this. One website I always recommend is Wolfram Alpha - it's free, efficient, and you can choose your parameters, such as password length and strength. Don't reuse passwords you've already used: this applies to any profile and account that needs password authentication. While some social profiles won't allow you to reuse old passwords and will prompt you to create a new one after a certain amount of days (e.g. Facebook), it is best practice to apply that to any account you use. Check for any inactive accounts: whether they're inactive because you're planning to use them in the future, or they're inactive because you don't need them anymore, keep a list of these accounts and change their password.  To conclude, here's one thing I definitely recommend: two-step authentication. This involves using two forms of authentication (e.g. a password and a code). Most banks, government websites, and local authorities use this form of protection (e.g. having to insert your password and a time-sensitive code generated from an app). Social tools are starting to do the same too: some of the first platforms to embrace this were Google+, YouTube and HootSuite (you can learn more about HootSuite two-step verification here). This high level of security can prevent "hacks" from outside sources, since knowing only the password to such an account would not be enough to log people in.  It's worth checking whether the social platforms you're on allow two-step authentication, and if they do, it's time to switch that option on, for your own security.
Veterans Affairs bureaucrats who rifled through the personal files of a department critic were handed written reprimands and three-day suspensions - penalties the victim calls a "slap on the wrist."  An internal investigation found 54 veterans bureaucrats improperly snooped through Sean Bruyea's personal files, including medical and psychiatric reports. Some of them used the information to smear the outspoken critic.  "These employees have been disciplined and department officials consider this matter has been successfully addressed and closed," said a Feb. 25 letter to Mr. Bruyea, obtained by The Canadian Press.  Story continues below advertisement  The two-month internal investigation determined that 614 employees handled his file over a number of years, but many had no need to do so.  Some of his personal information was included in briefing notes to former veterans affairs minister Greg Thompson in 2006 as the Conservative government prepared to implement the New Veterans Charter, which substantially overhauled benefits for former soldiers.  Revelations last fall of the sloppy handling of Mr. Bruyea's private information within the department stoked a political fire storm, which intensified when the federal privacy commissioner ruled bureaucrats violated privacy law in the matter. The federal government fast-tracked a $400,000, out-of-court settlement and an apology for Mr. Bruyea.  Veterans Affairs Minister Jean-Pierre Blackburn defended the punishments, saying there were a number of mitigating factors, including the amount of time that has elapsed and the fear of setting a precedent by firing offenders.  "It's unbelievable," Mr. Bruyea said upon learning the penalties, which were not outlined his letter.  Mr. Blackburn said there was no evidence officials "intended to harm" Mr. Bruyea, whose criticism risked derailing the launch of the charter.  The department didn't emphasize privacy protection before the Mr. Bruyea scandal erupted and that was also taken into account in deciding penalties, said the minister.  Story continues below advertisement  Story continues below advertisement  "I don't want to excuse what has happened, but it was part of the reality of the department at the time," said Mr. Blackburn. "We went as far as possible for the sanctions."  Sources at Veterans Affairs said some of the individuals have grieved the penalties under their collective agreements and the government has faced resistance from the federal employees' union.  Mr. Blackburn said a similar fiasco wouldn't happen today because bureaucrats now understand that what they did to Mr. Bruyea was wrong.  Last fall, the minister promised tough action and said some bureaucrats "may be fired" in the wake of the scandal, which struck at the heart of one of the Harper government's core constituencies - veterans.  Mr. Bruyea was shocked.  "He made the promise he would fire people," Mr. Bruyea said Tuesday. "Don't tell me they didn't understand what they were doing. Everyone of those briefing notes on me made reference to the Privacy Act. What are they going to do? Keep breaking the law?"  Story continues below advertisement  Three of the senior bureaucrats named in his lawsuit last fall have received promotions. Mr. Bruyea said the message to the public service is unambiguous.  "It doesn't even come close to making government wrongdoing accountable," he said. "It's obvious there are rewards and the message here is that the rewards for breaking the law are much greater than the punishment."  Part of the damage control exercise saw the department set up accountability sessions with staff to make sure they understood the limits of privacy legislation. That prompted a backlash with some federal officials at the department's headquarters in Charlottetown, who claimed they had been made scapegoats for the misdeeds of senior managers and political staff.  Leaked copies of internal department electronic messages, obtained and published by The Canadian Press last fall, show that one regional manager described the mandatory gatherings as "a farce."
The chandelier of the Bone Church in Kutna Hora Macabre art at the Sedlec OssuaryThe Bone Church in Kutna Hora, also known as the Sedlec Ossuary from the district of the same name, is something that leaves you speechless: decorated with the bones of over 40 000 human skeletons, it leaves you mixed feelings: it's the guilt of artistically enjoying dead bodies, something that it's usually seen only as pain and suffering, without being scared or disgusted. But actually this crypt is a really an enjoyable and extraordinary piece of macabre art, and quite easy to reach on a day trip from Prague, only 70 km far away by car or train. We were not planning to go there, actually we didn't even know the existence of this place, until some friends during our nomad travel told us about it.  Some of the remains of the unearthed bodies The history of the Sedlec Ossuary  The history of the Sedlec Ossuary in a nutshell, is quite interesting. Where nowadays is the Bone Church, it was before a very coveted burial place, that filled up quickly during the 14th century because of the Black Plague first and the Hussite War after. When it was decided to build there a roman catholic church, over 40 000 skeletons had to be unburied, to be deposited later in the lower chapel of the Church, the Ossuary. After a century a half-blind monk was given the duty to organize the remains of the unearthed bodies, that he simply stacked one over the other in the crypt. The masterpiece took shape only after 1870, when Frantisek Rint , a local woodcarver was commissioned the reorganization of the chapel that he transformed in what is known nowadays as the Bone Church. The bones were used as a decoration, and only superimposed to the preexisting structure of the Church made of bricks and stone. Decoration of the chandelier  The inte rior of the Bone Church  The most impressive piece of art is the central chandelier, that is said to be built with at least one piece of every bone present in the human body. Despite the Sedlec Ossuary probably owns it half of its fame, what is striking your attention while visiting are the details: garlands and crosses of skulls, angels and bones put together as if they always were, and a small bird that looks like is pecking a scared skeleton. The other element that is emerging is the light, creating nice contrasts and casting rays of light over the eccentric furnishings. Nice contrasts created by the light casting  A calm Angel dominating a composition of skulls  Further Exploration  Overall, the 3$ required to enter the Bone Church (student discounts and cumulative tickets also available) are definitely worth it, not to consider that there are other interesting landmarks to visit in Kutna Hora, like the Church of St Barbara, a beautiful UNESCO world heritage site. So you are warned, if you are planning to visit Prague don't miss a visit also to the Bone Church! And we found out that the Ossuary in Czech Republic is not the only one of this kind in the world: for sure we will not miss the opportunity to visit also the Bone Church in my hometown, Rome, called Santa Maria della Concezione dei Cappuccini or Capuchin Crypt. And we have another reason also to go to Portugal, and visit the "Capela dos Ossos" in Evora! A bony bird pecking a worried skull  Further Reading  If you want to find out more details about the history of the Sedlec Ossuary, you can visit Wikipedia.  The vault with the chandelier and the garlands of skulls  A believer in front of a back lit cross in the chapel  General view of the Bone Church
We are currently recruiting members for our Madden 19 leagues on both PS4 and Xbox One. We offer both sim style and competitive Madden leagues. Whether you are a casual player who likes to play football like you see on Sundays or a competitive player looking for elite competition we have a league for you!
Appearing on the Today Show earlier this morning, Senator Lindsey Graham (R-SC) said that President Trump has indicated to him that the administration is prepared to strike North Korea to prevent an attack against the U.S. Pushed on by Matt Lauer on whether a viable military option exists in the region, Graham responded: "They're wrong. There is a military option to destroy North Korea's program and North Korea itself."  "They're wrong. There is a military option to destroy North Korea's program and North Korea itself. If there's going to be a war to stop him [Kim Jong Un], it will be over there. If thousands die, they're going to die over there, they're not going to die here and he's [Trump] told me that to my face." "And that may be provocative, but not really. When you're president of the United States, where does your allegiance lie? To the people of the United States. This man, Kim Jong Un, is threatening America with a nuclear tip missile. President Trump doesn't want a war, the Chinese can stop this, but to China, South Korea, and Japan, Donald Trump is not going to allow this missile." "I'm saying it's inevitable unless North Korea changes because you're making our president pick between regional stability and homeland security. He's having to make a choice that no president wants to make. You can stop North Korea militarily or diplomatically, I prefer the diplomatic approach. But they will not be allowed to have a missile to hit America with a nuclear weapon on top and to allow them to do that is really abandoning homeland security."  WATCH: "They're wrong. There is a military option to destroy North Korea's program and North Korea itself." @LindseyGrahamSC pic.twitter.com/R0Bxjegjjn — TODAY (@TODAYshow) August 1, 2017  Of course, North Korea tested a second ICBM over the weekend which prompted the following statement from President Trump:  "North Korea's test launch today of another intercontinental bassistic missile - the second such test in less than a month - is only the latest reckless and dangerous action by the North Korean regime. The United States condemns this test and rejects the regime's claim that these tests - and these weapons - ensure North Korea's security. In reality, they have the opposite effect. By threatening the world, these weapons and tests further isolate North Korea, weaken its economy, and deprive it's people. The United States will take all necessary steps to ensure the security of the American homeland and protect our allies in the region."  * * *  For those who missed it, below is our note on NK's latest launch.  While North Korea has test fired numerous ballistic missiles (mostly intermediate-range, including one intercontinental) in the past, and as such today's launch was largely seen as merely the latest political provocation to Trump by a seemingly oblivious Kim John-Un, there was one notable difference in the launch post-mortem: according to press and Pentagon reports, the maximum altitude attained by the ICBM was 3,700 km (2,300 miles) with a flight time of about 47 minutes. This is material because according to All Things Nuclear, based on the latest information, today's missile test by North Korea could easily reach not only the US West Coast, but also a number of major US cities.  As reported earlier, North Korea launched its missile on a very highly lofted trajectory, which allowed the missile to fall in the Sea of Japan rather than overflying Japan. It appears the ground range of the test was around 1,000 km (600 miles), which put it in or close to Japanese territorial waters.  This is the place where North Korea launched its latest missile (left) and the Japanese island closest to its landing spot (right) pic.twitter.com/IPl4eRG5Yf — Anna Fifield (@annafifield) July 28, 2017  According to physicist and co-director of the UCS Global Security Program, David Wright, if those numbers are correct, then the missile flown on a standard trajectory would have a range 10,400 km (6,500 miles), not taking into account the Earth's rotation. Adding the rotation of the Earth increases the range of missiles fired eastward, depending on their direction. Calculating the range of the missile in the direction of some major US cities gives the approximate results in Table 1.  Table 1 shows that Los Angeles, Denver, and Chicago appear to be well within range of this missile, and that Boston and New York may be just within range. Washington, D.C. may be just out of range.  Wright caveats his calculations saying that "it is important to keep in mind that we do not know the mass of the payload the missile carried on this test. If it was lighter than the actual warhead the missile would carry, the ranges would be
Last video for 2017! All raw, all daddies - DadSafari. Get your p0pp3rs and p0t ready, get hlgh and prepare to get bred! Don't forget to comment, subscribe and get your p0pp3rs friends to watch this too! Let me know what you want to see next.  Last video for 2017! All raw, all daddies - DadSafari. Get your p0pp3rs and p0t ready, get hlgh and prepare to get bred! Don't forget to comment, subscribe and get your p0pp3rs friends to watch this too! Let me know what you want to see next.
21 January 2013  Dr Victoria Burchell By  Appeared in BioNews 689  Rare genetic variant may have a significant impact on a person's risk of developing autism, research suggests. In one of the largest genome-wide studies of its kind, scientists have identified 25 'high impact' genetic variants that are associated with the developmental disorder.  'Many of these gene variants may serve as valuable predictive markers', said Dr Hakon Hakonarson, director of the Centre for Applied Genomics at the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, who led the study. 'If so, they may become part of a clinical test that will help evaluate whether a child has an autism spectrum disorder'.  Existing genetic test for autism focus on single letter changes in DNA called single nucleotide polymorphisms. The authors of the current study instead investigated the effect of copy number variants (CNVs). CNVs are deletions or duplications of large stretches of DNA, resulting in either an increase or a decrease in the number of copies of genes encoded by that DNA.  In the study published in the journal PLOS ONE, scientists first analysed the DNA from 55 families with multiple members diagnosed with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) and identified 153 CNVs that could potentially be linked to the disorders. They then investigated the prevalence of these and other previously reported CNVs in 3,000 people with autism and 6,000 people in a control group.  Of these CNVs, 25 novel variants were found to be associated with autism, such that a person carrying the variant was suggested to be twice as likely to develop the disorder as someone who is not.  The study was performed in collaboration with the genetic diagnostics company Lineagen and the authors hope that the newly identified variants will be useful clinically.  'These high-impact variants could be most useful in advising parents who already have one child with an ASD', said Dr Hakonarson. 'If a second child has delays in reaching developmental milestones, testing for these CNVs could help predict whether that child is also likely to develop an ASD'.  Genetic tests for autism are already commercially available, although some scientists and clinicians remain sceptical of the value of this approach. Speaking to the Salt Lake Tribune, Professor Lynn Jorde, chair of the department of human genetics at the University of Utah, said that scientists have identified fewer than 20 percent of the genes linked to autism.  'Any genetic testing is only going to identify a small portion of cases', he said. 'Families should be aware that even if the child has been diagnosed as autistic, genetic testing probably won't find a cause'.
IRELAND'S CATHOLIC BISHOPS have extended an invitation for Pope Francis to come to Ireland for a visit in August 2018.  The Pope has acknowledged the invitation and says he will give the offer "careful consideration".  Enda Kenny meanwhile has said that the Government will back the visit should it come to fruition and will "make all the arrangements necessary to treat him in a manner befitting the head of the Catholic Church".  37 years ago the visit of Pope John Paul II drew huge crowds wherever he went across the country, most notably in the Phoenix Park where 1.25 million people saw him celebrate Mass on Saturday, 29 September 1979. But would the visit of Pope Francis attract similar levels of attention?  We're asking: If Pope Francis visits Ireland will you go to see him?
Statistically speaking, John Tavares had one of the better games of his career against the Washington Capitals on March 13, 2012.  The 21-year-old was on the ice for all four goals scored by the New York Islanders that night. He scored twice, assisted on another and delivered a shootout goal while winning 11 of 17 faceoffs and holding his own against NHL mega-star Alex Ovechkin at Nassau Coliseum.  Tavares played 23:07 and wasn't on the ice for a single goal against.  It was the sixth time during the 2011-12 season Tavares had at least three points in a game – he had four points in consecutive games in early October. Only Pittsburgh Penguins star Evgeni Malkin (9), who won the Art Ross Trophy, Steven Stamkos (9) of the Tampa Bay Lightning, Claude Giroux (11) of the Philadelphia Flyers, Jason Spezza (7) of the Ottawa Senators and Ilya Kovalchuk (9) of the New Jersey Devils had more games last season with at least three points.  John Tavares Center - NYI GOALS: 13 | ASST: 12 | PTS: 25  SOG: 76 | +/-: -4  Tavares finished last season tied for seventh in points with James Neal of the Penguins and Henrik Sedin of the Vancouver Canucks , two of the bigger names in the League. He was one of three players, along with Malkin and Spezza, with at least 30 goals and 50 assists.  By any measure, it was a breakout season for the first pick in the 2009 Draft. Tavares is one of the rare players to make the immediate jump to the NHL in his draft year. As far as players who fit that bill since 2005, Tavares' 202 points in his first three seasons trail only the first three seasons of Crosby, Stamkos and Patrick Kane of the Chicago Blackhawks.  Is it fair to say that right now, Tavares is one of the best players in the NHL?  "I do, and it's not just because he's my linemate," Brad Boyes, who signed with the Islanders as a free agent in July, told NHL.com. "To be honest, I think he's one of the best players just in terms of an overall skill set. When you look at points, that's one thing -- a lot of times, that's what people attribute it to, how many points you get. But I think it's the way you get them. That's the biggest thing."  Tavares enters play Tuesday night tied for third in scoring with 25 points in 19 games. He's young, good-looking, extremely talented and plays in the New York metropolitan area, the biggest media market in the world. Yet "John Tavares" is far from a household name in the Big Apple, as the Islanders lack the same following as the Rangers, an Original Six franchise.  It's one thing for teammates to sing the praises of Tavares, but his opponents and observers are well aware of his recent emergence as one of the game's elite players.  A slot machine  John Carlson of the Washington Capitals is one of the budding young defensemen in the NHL. Still only 23, Carlson has a fairly good chance to represent the United States at the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi.  Carlson assumed a role as one of the Caps' top-two blueliners last season, and he had a firsthand look at Tavares during the aforementioned game on Long Island. He was on the ice for both of Tavares' goals and wasn't able to prevent a pass by Tavares on a power-play goal that led to a secondary assist.  Carlson goes against Stamkos and the Lightning six times a season and usually draws the assignment of trying to stop Crosby when the Caps face the Penguins. Yet Carlson says Tavares presents a special challenge when the two are on the ice together.  "All those guys have different skill sets that are hard in their own respect, but I think he's one of the most, if not the, deadliest guy in the slot," Carlson, who was also teammates with Tavares for part of a season with the London Knights of the Ontario Hockey League, told NHL.com. "He's got an amazing shot and he's really good at battling down low and finding pucks in people's skates. He can make plays too. He's a passer. You can't always just take away the shot like you can with some guys or else is he's going to beat you. It's definitely not easy."  Asked how Tavares compares to Crosby, Carlson said, "I think he's got a little bit better of a shot. A Crosby shot, don't get me wrong, it's amazing. I think [Tavares] is one of the best if you put him in the slot. I'd take him over anyone."
Intel is integrating its latest graphics capabilities found in Haswell PC chips into new Xeon chips, as the company looks to improve the quality of graphics on mobile devices.  Intel on Tuesday demonstrated Iris Pro graphics integrated in Xeon E3-1200 v3 Xeon processors, which are for low-end to midrange servers. Iris Pro graphics, found in Intel's high-end Core processors, is the chip maker's most advanced graphics technology, and is used in a few PCs that can handle full high-definition and 3D games.  Servers with the Xeon chips will be faster at converting high-end graphics into lower-pixel images for delivery over the Internet to PCs and mobile devices, Intel said. The server chips will be available later this year.  The combination or Xeon and Iris Pro "will support rich remote workloads like CAD, 3D rendering, video editing and other complex workflows and will help OEMs to design and distribute extremely dense and energy efficient solutions for the data center," said Frank Soqui, general manager at Intel, in a blog entry.  The combination will be able to process CAD/CAM applications and stream graphics based on OpenGL and DirectX, an Intel spokesman said.  Servers already harness CPUs and GPUs for delivery of online gaming and workstation applications. Nvidia has formulated the GRID server reference design specifically for that purpose, and the model combines x86 server processors with Nvidia's discrete graphics cards. Dell, Hewlett-Packard and IBM are offering GRID servers. Discrete graphics cards are faster than integrated graphics, but can add to the cost of servers.  Integrated graphics such as in the new Xeon chips allow for denser and more power-efficient servers, an Intel spokesman said.  The integrated graphics subsystem has 40 execution units and 128MB of embedded DRAM. The CPU and the GPU share memory resources. The chips were shown at the Citrix Synergy conference in Los Angeles.  Intel has also added graphics virtualization technologies, which speed up video encode and decode on the chips. The new technologies could provide direct access, share or virtualize a GPU.
Simplified list of episodes  "Nasty Patty" is a SpongeBob SquarePants episode from season three. In this episode, SpongeBob and Mr. Krabs create a tainted Krabby Patty.  Characters  Synopsis  On a dark and stormy night at Bikini Atoll , the French Narrator is reminded of the story of when Mr. Krabs and SpongeBob thought they killed the health inspector and decides to tell it.  Shower In A Can! This section is in need of cleanup in order to comply with Encyclopedia SpongeBobia's Manual of Style . Please help Encyclopedia SpongeBobia by making this section specific and short.  Production  Music  ( ‣ ) Associated production music  ( • ) Original music  ( ◦ ) SpongeBob music   ‣  One bright sunny morning at the Krusty Krab , SpongeBob is cooking and Mr. Krabs is having a "money bath," and a health inspector arrives for a surprise inspection. He tells SpongeBob to get him one of everything off the menu, which he does. After a few dishes, he orders one ordinary Krabby Patty before he can pass judgment.Meanwhile, a television report reveals that someone is passing himself off as a health inspector to obtain free food. Outraged at the thought of giving free food, Mr. Krabs believes that the health inspector that is on their premises is the impostor, and thus he and SpongeBob make a " Nasty Patty ," a Krabby Patty that has been made with Volcano Sauce , seahorse radish, toenail clippings, then dropped into the toilet and dried with Mr. Krabs' gym socks. Just before the health inspector eats it, a fly goes into his mouth, chokes him, and knocks him out. As SpongeBob and Mr. Krabs enjoy watching him suffer from the kitchen thinking he already ate it, another TV report comes on that reveals that he was not the impostor. They believe that their patty killed the health inspector, and begin to panic. They keep giving each other the blame and ultimately decide to take the body and bury it. SpongeBob, Mr. Krabs, and the "dead" body of the inspector go up the hill, SpongeBob humorously disgusted with the body, and repeatedly spraying himself and the body with disinfectant and dragging it with a tissue. Mr. Krabs orders SpongeBob to dig a hole to bury the body in, and after hitting a rock, SpongeBob throws it out of the way—and on to the health inspector's head, who was just waking up, knocking him back into unconsciousness. The police then suddenly arrive, offering to take them back to the Krusty Krab. SpongeBob is too shocked for words and becomes extremely nervous. The rain causes the mud on the hill to erode, exposing the body of the health inspector. SpongeBob puts it in the trunk of the car. By this point, SpongeBob has humorously become maniacal with his nervousness and slides in the car without any motion. SpongeBob and Mr. Krabs discuss the plan on what to do with the body, and nearly reveals it to the officers, only to be quickly stopped and saved by Mr. Krabs. By this point, the suspicion is raised between the police and SpongeBob and Mr. Krabs. SpongeBob is in charge of taking the body and the shovel and stowing it into the freezer. However, the back door is locked, leaving SpongeBob to carry on his most difficult task: he marches through the front door—with the body stuffed hilariously into his hat, making him lose his balance as he struggles to walk over to the door to the kitchen freezer. The officers question Krabs about SpongeBob's strange behavior, only for him to attempt to stall them and bribe them with money. The officers are then called through their walkie-talkies and receive a report about two people burying a body on the hill—obviouslySpongeBob and Mr. Krabs with the inspector. But as they are about to leave, the officer wants a soda, which Mr. Krabs quickly hands over. But then the officer wants ice as well, and Mr. Krabs grows really nervous—which only makes the officer nearly march into the freezer. But Mr. Krabs, nervous beyond definition, barricades the door and barrels excuses about the ice. The officer simply shoves him aside and is about to get the ice herself, when they confess their crimes. SpongeBob and Mr. Krabs throw blackmails and blames on each other, and when they reveal that the body is supposedly in the freezer, she opens the door, and there is nothing there. She thinks it is a joke and closes the door. She jokingly suggests that he became a zombie and walked out, and the health inspector suddenly appears behind them. The police begin savagely beating him, believing him to truly be a zombie, and after they
(Audio Version)             In 52 years of life I have never witnessed a time in our country and maybe even the world where people were more divided. The title of our lesson is a spin-off of a saying used in some mottos and even some songs that says, "United we stand, divided we fall." No one really knows the origin of the phrase but we can see the principle of the idea at work when Jesus said, "If a kingdom is divided against itself, that kingdom cannot stand. If a house is divided against itself, that house cannot stand (Mk 3:24-25)." I sense that there is a calculated effort to divide our country and our world; Not along the lines of ideas but along lines where division is unnatural and destructive. For example, some political leaders, along with their political operatives, recognize that it is easier to consolidate their power within smaller groups than it is within the larger populous. How is this accomplished? Division! Women are pitted against men with the "war on women" offensive anytime someone suggests even the slightest restriction on murdering babies through abortion. Non-white people are turned against white people with the liberal use of the "racism" card whenever a white person even hints at the disproportionate danger that the failing public school system, government subsidies and the welfare state poses for racial minorities. The rich, pejoratively described as the "millionaires and billionaires," are demonized consistently as victimizing the poor by building wealth on the backs of the poor as though no one benefits from the wealth of the rich because we all know that the rich don't employ or otherwise support millions of other people but instead bury their money in a hole in the backyard or hide it between their mattresses {read: sarcasm} . Even children are shamefully used to blame their parents for all the ills of our country. Anyone who doesn't embrace the militant gay-rights agenda and same-sex marriage is labeled a "homophobe." The elderly are constantly warned by the fear-mongers that those who are younger believe they are a strain on the financial system and might have to forfeit their social security and medical benefits. Union bosses fan the embers of hatred that always seem to be present between its unionized constituency and management. And these are just a few of the divisions that are constantly being manipulated. But worst of all, Christians are afraid to take stand up for biblical truth and shine a light on the evils of our culture because they are immediately labeled as hateful and intolerant as though name-calling somehow changes the truth about evil. Power brokers, fear-mongers and race-baiters might look at this and see an effective strategy but I see something deeply troubling and evil. We are not meant to be divided along any of these lines. This is not division based on ideas that might be natural since we are uniquely created individuals. This division is unnatural and evil with the final result being hatred of one another. And who benefits most when people hate each other? Temporally, people seeking power and fame might benefit by peoples' hatred for one another but ultimately, Satan benefits when humanity is divided and bathed in hatred. We think that our difficulty is with people who have different ideas than we do. But differing ideas don't, in and of themselves, create hate. Differing ideas can be good because the can open our minds to another way; maybe a better way. As I said before, differing ideas are the result of uniquely created human beings. Instead, we are fighting against the Devil who uses sinful humanity to advance his cause of leading as many people away from God as possible. It is an age-old, yet brilliantly devious, strategy of turning humanity against one another. Hatred and division are the great obstacles to being in relationship with God. One cannot love God yet hate humanity (1 John 4:20; 21). Paul spoke of the unity of the Church in his letter to the church in Ephesus—the unity between all people: husbands and wives; children and parents; masters (employers) and slaves (employees). In the context of Paul's teaching about unity in his letter to the Ephesians, Paul uses a military illustration to make his point. There is a battle raging, but it's not a battle of ideas and even though it appears on the surface to be a battle between people, it's really a battle between good and evil. Satan knows that once humanity is divided, sin will take its natural course and grow into hatred. Satan also knows that an environment of unity is the most conducive environment for nurturing love. This is the environment of the Church; at least it should be. The Church is the place where love must flourish. It's no accident that the Church is called the "comm—unity" of faith. Satan knows that United We Love, Divided We Hate . Subject Text Ephesians 6:10-18             10 Finally, be strong in the Lord and in his mighty power. 11 Put on the full
Greetings, Raiders!   This is GM Orvel.   We have one good news for ya!  King's Raid has recorded the 1st Rank in Singapore Appstore Top Grossing! WOW!! XD  It was possible to be on the top of the appstore due to enthusiastic raiders!  So, we've prepared something special in return!!   [Special Gift for all:: 1st Rank in Singapore Appstore Top Grossing]   For who? :: For all Raiders who love King's Raid (All Servers)   What?   - 300 Rubies   ** The reward will be sent at 00:00, 14th Nov 2017  ** Please do not forget to receive the rubies until 23:59:59, 14th Nov 2017   ** This reward will be given only once when King's Raid goes on the 1st Rank in each store or  market for all serviced countries.   Thank you  GM Orvel
So if you do not find the software that you want and you are inspired to make it happen, then why should not you go for it? Someone has to be the one to move things forward.  Suppose that you want, and you cannot find, something that is simple, quick-to-learn, and easy-to-use. Is it the case that software has gone as far as it possibly can go in terms of minimalism, learnability, and usability? No, not even close. Will there ever be better solutions? Yes, of course.  That is wrong, and it is not hard to see through. If there can be nothing new then either (1) anything that you want, you should to be able to find (because it already exists) or (2) it is impossible for what you want to ever exist.  One can make the case that there is "nothing new under the sun" in the world of software. All of it has already been done. If this is so, it is a waste of time to try to do anything new. Someone else already beat you to it. Whatever is the problem, what you should do is find the existing solution, RTFM, and adopt it.  II.
(Tamika Moore photo)  By Julia Sayers  Summer is the time when Birmingham really comes alive, with festivals, events, and outdoor activities (despite the heat). We thought about what a Birmingham summer meant to us, and compiled our list of 55 must-do activities for the season. See how many you can check off and tag your photos with the hashtag #bhambucketlist. We'll regram our favorites!  Why 55?  Birmingham magazine's anniversary is coming up, so we thought it was appropriate to honor 55 years of consecutive publishing with 55 of our favorite activities.  This story appears in Birmingham magazine's June 2016 Issue. Subscribe today!
Sep 2, 2016 - I would get double takes by people walking down the street, and have them come ... It's also helped her feel more comfortable with her body. ... think of my body because I know what it's capable of," she has said on Instagram.
Kuala Lumpur - Malaysia's rapid ascent as a solar energy equipment manufacturer has triggered allegations of underhanded strategies.  The country, which did not have a solar industry before 2007, was the world's fourth-largest producer of solar cells last year behind China, Taiwan and Japan.  Its fast growth is mainly attributed to the influx of multinational corporations, including the US First Solar, Taiwan's AUO Sunpower, Germany's Hanwa Q Cells and Japan's Panasonic Energy.  In the past two years, the government has granted five other foreign companies permission to set up their own production plants, the Malaysian Investment Development Agency (MIDA) said.  But competitors cast are leery of Malaysia's solar sector.  The Ministry of International Trade and Industry said it is working with the European Union on allegations that Chinese manufacturers have re-labelled their products "Made in Malaysia" to circumvent EU requirements imposed on Chinese solar products.  The Office of the US Trade Representative has also expressed concern about generous tax breaks granted to foreign investors, including solar energy manufacturers.  It asked Malaysia to provide details of how it works so that other countries can assess whether the tax breaks violate a World Trade Organisation ban on export subsidies.  The government says solar companies are attracted to Malaysia because of the country's vibrant semi-conductor manufacturing sector, a process similar to that of making solar cells.  "This makes Malaysia a perfect fit for the solar industry to build upon," MIDA said.  Other factors contributing to Malaysia's rise are a combination of low-cost labour with the availability of skilled engineers, according to Song Eng Eng, an analyst at EXIM Bank Malaysia.  A 100% income tax break for 10 years, along with a 100% investment tax allowance for capital expenditures, has persuaded solar manufacturers to relocate to Malaysia, Song said.  The subsidies provided to attract foreign investments are within international trade rules, the government said.  Beyond manufacturing  "Just like in other promoted sectors, Malaysia provides incentives in the form of corporate tax exemptions to all eligible enterprises engaging in solar industry on a non-discriminatory basis," MIDA said.  Malaysia's solar industry has also benefited from a trade war between the US and China in the solar manufacturing sector, it said.  When the US government imposed higher tariffs on solar manufacturers from China and Taiwan a year ago, there should have been "no surprise" that these manufacturers would seek new sites for their export markets, MIDA said.  Chinese energy giant Jinko Solar has set up a factory in Penang, Malaysia this year in its efforts to diversify its manufacturing facilities, said company spokesman Sebastian Liu.  "We like the overall business environment there," Liu said.  The key to continued success in Malaysia's solar industry would be to go beyond manufacturing and exporting cells, and focus on the installation and use of solar energy in the country, said Wei-Nee Chen, chief corporate officer of Sustainable Energy Development Authority of Malaysia.  Expanding the use of solar energy in Malaysia would ensure sustainable growth of the local solar industry and insulate it from the vagaries of the global trade environment, Chen said.  The country's internal targets for renewable energy usage are attainable, Chen said, because of cheap production costs and Malaysia's favourable location.  "Malaysia lies in the sun belt, so everywhere you go in Malaysia there is always the sun. You can put PV [solar cells] throughout the country," she said.
I used Cisco Packet Tracer 5.1, which is a simulation piece of software that emulates the routers, supplied by work. On the diagrams it shows you the name of the router and switch being 2811 for Routers and 2960 for Switches.  Click to expand...
SHARE THIS ARTICLE Share Tweet Post Email  President Donald Trump's economic advisers pitched his new tax plan as a cut for the middle class and not the wealthy, but the opposite may be true. Tax policy experts say its current provisions would undoubtedly mean lower taxes for top earners, while the impact on middle incomes is less clear.  Trump's blueprint -- a list of bullet points released on April 26 -- would directly reduce taxes for upper earners by cutting the top income-tax rate to 35 percent from 39.6 percent; eliminate the Alternative Minimum Tax, which raises the tax bills of certain taxpayers on the higher side of the income scale; and scrap a 3.8 percent investment income tax under Obamacare that applies to individuals with incomes of more than $200,000. The plan would also repeal the estate tax, which would save an estimated $200 billion over a decade for individuals with estates worth more than $5.45 million.  So-called pass-through businesses also would pay the same 15 percent tax rate that Trump has proposed for corporations, which would financially benefit not only mom-and-pop shops but also big partnerships like law firms and business empires like his own.  Read more: 'Dynamic Scoring' and More Tax Terms to Know  "We can confirm that outline shows plenty of benefits to high-income earners," said Alan Cole, an economist with the conservative-leaning Tax Foundation. "And for the middle class? Honestly, we don't know."  Trump's Own Taxes  As the name suggests, pass-through businesses pass their income through to their owners, who pay taxes at their individual rates. For high-income owners, that rate is currently 39.6 percent, and reducing it to 15 percent would be a major tax cut.  In an interview with Fox News that aired on April 28, Trump brushed aside concerns about the pass-through cut. He focused on his call to cut the top individual rate to 35 percent and to eliminate most deductions.  "If I'm individually paying 35 percent, I will tell you that's more," he said during the interview. "I'm going to end up paying more than I pay right now." He added: "The reason I will pay more is because I'm going to lose all the deductions."  The one-page blueprint proposes, without specifics, to "eliminate targeted tax breaks that mainly benefit the wealthiest taxpayers." It calls for protecting the popular and costly deductions for mortgage interest and charitable giving.  White House economic adviser Gary Cohn tried to frame the proposal as beneficial to the middle class, saying some people would pay little or no taxes under Trump's plan.  Axing Deductions  "We're eliminating the deductions that were added to tax legislation over years to favor the wealthy," he said Monday on CBS. "Middle-income people and lower-income people don't have deductions. Wealthy people have deductions."  Cole estimated that eliminating every itemized deduction would raise about $2.2 trillion over a decade, which he said is less money than would be lost because of lower tax revenues. "So you're at a larger net cut for the wealthy," he said.  William Gale, a senior fellow on taxes and fiscal policy at the nonpartisan Brookings Institution, also said that even if all available deductions were eliminated, "I don't see how the plan could avoid being an enormous tax cut for high-income households."  Carried Interest  One group might see higher taxes: Investment managers stand to lose the carried-interest tax break, which allows for them to pay lower tax rates on their earnings than average workers, Reince Priebus, Trump's chief of staff, said Sunday on ABC.  Trump's one-page tax-plan outline didn't mention the break, but "the president wants to get rid of carried interest," Priebus said.  Cole said the pass-through business tax cut to 15 percent would go "almost exclusively to the wealthy." Leonard Burman of the Tax Policy Center called it "a giant, juicy loophole for high-income people."  Burman said "there's no way" that Trump's plan won't lower taxes for top earners, despite the rhetoric from his administration.  "This isn't about a dramatic cut in taxes for the wealthy," Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said on NBC on April 27, one day after unveiling the plan with Cohn. "This is about a middle-income tax cut."  'Bigger Cuts'  Gale, who co-authored a study on 2012 Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney's tax plan, said it called for fewer tax cuts than Trump's blueprint. Nonetheless, Romney's plan "could not avoid being a tax cut for the top 1 percent, even if all income-tax expenditures were closed," Gale said. He said Trump's plan has "significantly bigger cuts at the top," making it mathematically impossible not to be a tax cut for high incomes.  The impact
Narendra Modi on Sunday was addressing the BJP National Council Meet in Delhi.  Here are highlights from the speech:  * Before this election, the nation was never in such a poor condition.  * India has never been so leader-less.  * Congress workers came to Delhi seeking a PM candidate and they returned with 3 cylinders of LPG.  * Congress session was a way to save their party. How to save the party was the issue they discussed.  * When Indira Gandhi was assassinated, Rajiv Gandhi rushed to hospital and in moments he was declared PM. Was there a Congress Parliamentary meeting to decide Rajiv Gandhi would be the PM.  * In 2004, Congress Parliamentary Party did not pick Manmohan Singh to be PM, but Madam Sonia Gandhi. Sonia Gandhi nominated Manmohan Singh and he was made PM. You can't escape with these talks of Parliamentary panel.  * See a human reason for Congress decision. When defeat is imminent, will any other mother sacrifice her son?  * Nowadays there is a lot being spoken about 'chai-walas', a lot of 'chai-walas' in the nation are moving around proudly.  * Congress, which is led by such an influential family, is fighting with a tea vendor today.  * They are Naamdar, but I am Kaamdar.  * We mustn't take regional aspirations as a burden on our country, instead it can be a opportunity for the country's growth.  * I want that PM and CMs of all states be part of one team and take the country forward together.  * Bad governance responsible for problems facing the country, we want to move forward with good governance.  * Country needs development and delivery, heard a lot about need to act but now time for real action.  * In the last 10 years PM only formed committees, but now country needs commitment not committees.  * Need to lay importance on participative democracy than on representative democracy.  * Until we talk of the poor there is no fun, they think. We don't sleep well thinking of the plight of the poor.  * They believe money doesn't go on trees. We believe it grows in farms and is the result of labour.  * They want to divide and rule, we want to unite and progress. They think of how to save party, we want to save nation.  * They think only those with Congress in heart will win, we think only those with Bharatmata in their heart will get a ticket.  * I appeal to the people of nation, you gave the nation to them for 60, give us the opportunity of just 60 months and see.  * There should be a price stabilisation fund to ensure that there is always food in the plate of the poor.  * If Atal Bihari Vajpayee could do it, I promise you the BJP govt of 2014 will stop inflation.  * Narendra Modi suggests rainbow strategy: Preseve land, forests, water and innovate its use.  * Black money hoarded abroad will be brought back, used for development, welfare of the people, country.  * We have such an extensive railways. It's sad how it has been neglected.  * We have to move forward with a mission 'beti bachao, beti padhao'.  * We have to change our outlook towards women as just homemakers, we must look at them as nation builders.  * We should also develop the twin city concept. Like New York-New Jersey. We can benefit from it.  * We can help India become a global brand with: Talent, trade, tradition, tourism and technology.  * My idea of India is 'Satyameva Jayate'.  * The victory in elections takes birth in every polling booth. It is our duty to worry about every polling booth.  * When there is a chaiwallah on the battlefield the nation will willingly fill our coffers.
Sean Avery is hounding homeless people for his own amusement on Snapchat.  "I follow Sean Avery on Snapchat, and he has this running skit where he goes up to random homeless people sleeping and asks for the time," reported Twitter user @cwines_90.  While the social-media app erases videos after 24 hours, there was one up Friday where the volatile former Ranger approaches a sleeping woman in a tent on the sidewalk to ask the time as she wakes up confused.  His street harassment has apparently been going on for a while. "There's a video on Sean Avery's Instagram of him telling a homeless dude to go get a job," says a 2013 tweet.  Other posts on Friday included him yelling at pedestrians to get out of the way and one of a skull, boasting, "I just want everyone to know, when I'm violently mean towards people on Snapchat, I always turn around and say 'I'm sorry.' " He then continues, saying, "Bulls - - t. That's a disclaimer for Snapchat."  Avery is more famed for his temper than anything he did on the ice. He wed model Hilary Rhoda last October in the Hamptons shortly after a run-in with police when he was arrested for throwing rocks at cars. The charges were dropped, but his parting shot to the cops was to yell at them as he left the station, "What are you guys doing tonight? I am going to my multimillion-dollar home to f - - k a supermodel."  In 2014, he quit an off-Broadway play days before the opening after making an assistant stagehand cry when she offered him pizza.  And following a New York Post article that featured Mets pitcher Matt Harvey wearing a thin tie and white shirt, former Vogue intern Avery commented, "I just puked . . . His stylist should be thrown in jail."  When we asked for comment on the hounding of the homeless, Avery snarked, "No comment, but if you tell me what street corner [Post columnist] Richard Johnson sleeps on, I will go wake him up. Congrats to you for the powerful reporting you are doing. Continued success."
Get daily updates directly to your inbox Subscribe Thank you for subscribing See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email  A woman who has supported Labour for most of her life was shocked to be rejected when she tried to join the party following a "cult-like" telephone call from party researchers.  Cassie Ogden, from Trevor, Wrexham, wanted to join and cast a vote in the party's leadership election after being inspired by surprise front runner, Jeremy Corbyn.  Around a month ago she applied in writing to join the party.  On Tuesday she received a telephone call from party researchers during which they asked her which party she voted for in the General Election and she replied, Plaid Cymru.  The following day she received an email rejecting her application.  WATCH: Jeremy Corbyn address packed crowd in Llandudno  Some in the Labour party have expressed fears that the leadership election could be infiltrated by non-supporters to skew the result.  Cassie, 35, a university researcher said: "I have supported Labour for the majority of my life, although I did vote Plaid at the last election because I believe there are similar policies with Jeremy Corbyn on some issues.  "I have never been a member of another political party, but I wanted to join Labour after Jeremy became involved in the leadership race and I wanted to vote. Isn't that the nature of politics? You can disagree and debate?  "On Tuesday, I got this telephone call from a party researcher, basically telling me they had reason to believe that I didn't support the Labour statement of commitment.  "I was at home with my child and I was having this accusation levelled at me. I am really on the back foot and in a bit of shock. I was asked to repeat the Labour commitment statement again, which I did, but it felt like I was joining some sort of cult.  "This is a democracy and support can change.  "They asked me who I voted at the last election. I should have said none of your business, but I said Plaid and that was it."  Cassie, who would have voted for Mr Corbyn, the MP for Islington North, was then officially rejected by email.  No Comment  A Labour Party spokesman said they would not comment on individual cases.  But he said: "The Labour Party has a robust system to prevent fraudulent or malicious applications.  "All applications to join the Labour Party as a member, affiliate or supporter are verified, and those who are identified by our verification team as being candidates, members or supporters of another political party will be denied a vote."  The party said there are several reasons why prospective party members could be rejected.  They include not being on the electoral register, or having stood for another political party at the last general election, local elections or European elections.  They also include people who nominated candidates for other parties at previous elections, and those who are known campaigners for, or members of, other parties.
On Sunday, December 27th, I sat in my office stressed out. A big campaign we had launched in November had not taken off like we hoped it would. The idea had received some coverage on California TV , Huffington Post, and the Washington Times but we really needed much more if we wanted to make the idea happen.  Backstory  This happens a lot when you launch a media campaign. The initial idea doesn't take off on the first shot and from there you need to hustle and make magic happen. Without the magic, it will flop.  The only difference this time was that the idea had cost our client $1 million dollars and our ass (and reputation) was on the line like never before. Our client was a successful entrepreneur who has big political plans in California. The only issue: no one knew him. So we decided the best way to make him known would be to do something that would totally shake up the California political landscape and put him in the spotlight. And it wasn't just an idea: it was a proposed law that we wanted our client try to get passed.  We took the idea from a popular internet political joke: Wouldn't it be nice if politicians wore the logos of their sponsors like Nascar drivers so we know who owns them? It was funny meme and was generally well-received. We pitched it to our client and advised that he try to make it a law through the California ballot initiative process. He agreed and gave us a budget of $1 million to make it happen.  Despite the initial coverage when the idea was announced, it just had not taken off like we had hoped.  The Hack(s)  On that Sunday night as I sat there stressed out, I began testing new ideas. After a quick brainstorm, I set my sights on Reddit. I follow various threads on Reddit on a daily basis and understand the power it has to make something go viral. I just didn't know how to do it.  I knew that if I could get one of my links to the top of Reddit Politics, I would have a pretty good chance of making the idea spread, so I set that as my goal: Get to the top of Reddit Politics within 24 hours.  What I did next was simple and cheap. From my own personal reddit account (Probably should have used a fake account or someone else's), I posted a link to our Washington Times story on Reddit Politics.  Then I went to Fiverr.com and bought every UpVote package that was offered. Total cost: $35. Two hours later I came back to check the results. We were number one with over 500 comments already.  We had media lists built of every journalist and writer in politics and began blasting them with "anonymous" tips from fake email addresses.  Here are some of the "tips" we sent out.  We sent these types of emails out to over 20,000 media contacts from 6 different email accounts.  The media requests began to pour in like we've never seen before. We had so many requests coming in it was challenging to respond to them all. That is a great, great problem to have.  Vice, Al Jazeera , US News , even Anonymous wrote about the idea, and every time we got a new media hit, we followed the same process on Reddit. Post the link to various Reddit threads and then go on Fiverr and buy UpVotes to make sure we got to the top. In just the first few days, we had over 50 media outlets covering our story.  As the idea continued to spread like wildfire, our website began to crash. In 3 days alone, we had received over 2 million hits to the website, but most importantly, we had had over 4,000 volunteers sign up.  Keeping it Going  To keep our momentum going, we sent out this urgent request to those volunteers, pleading for their support to spread our idea. We turned our 4,000 supporters into a media pitching machine.  Here's the email we sent out:  Another wave of media requests came in from this push and we just kept up with the same process: Post on Reddit, buy UpVotes, repeat.  Conclusion  In less than a few days we had generated over 5,000,000 media impressions and received over 6 million website hits. Total cost? $255 from Fiverr.com.  This gave the campaign the boost we needed and it was all the direct result of one thing: hustle . This was not a clear cut path and there was no how-to guide. It was really just making it up as we went.  While this might not work with every idea, I wanted to pass on a framework that others can use to execute similar strategies. Regardless of industry, Reddit can be a very powerful tool for businesses because every industry has their own Sub-Reddit, and sometimes several. This is where journalists often
Exerpeutic Folding Magnetic Upright Bike With Pulse is the machine you need in your exercises, it is upright enabling you stretch the muscles on your back and also the spinal get stretched minimizing back pains.  Continuous exercises are very important for your body. If you have never known without exercises, you will be pushing your life to the corner near to death. How many will like to die, we ignore exercises ignorantly but later get ourselves in difficult situations. You need to break some fats from your body every day to be comfortable that you are living a healthy life.  See Product Details: Exerpeutic Folding Magnetic Upright Bike With Pulse  There are several machines you can make use of in stretching your body and making your muscles strong. The back born is another essential part of the body you need to take care of. The Exerpeutic Folding Magnetic Upright Bike With Pulse is made of great materials generally and is a strong bit of apparatus. The bicycle is exceptionally strong and stable when you're cycling. I had never claimed an attractive safety bicycle previously, so I was a bit apprehensive about the idea.  At the same time, I am exceptionally inspired with the peaceful, smooth accelerating activity of the bicycle at all levels of safety. I am in normal physical condition, and the bicycle gives all that could possibly be needed safety at level 4 to provide 6 for me a decent workout.  I spent roughly 25 minutes to assemble Exerpeutic Folding Magnetic Upright Bike. A lot of the gathering is carried out before you take it out of the container; the edge and handlebars are independently amassed. The one thumb here is that the guidelines could most likely be simpler to take after.  However, it was still less demanding than emulating the directions that accompany a regular DIY work area. I have had the bicycle for about nine months and have logged approximately 3500 miles. I can't talk on its lifespan past 3500.  It is as yet running like it was the day I assemble it. Almost no commotion, smooth accelerating, doesn't wobble, and simple to set away. The main thing keeping it away from getting five stars is the seat. To me it happens to be bigger forcing me to sit to the front so that I can cycle without straining.  In spite of the seat being bigger for me, it works exactly smart and I do enjoy doing my exercises. I can feel strong, my legs are not aching anymore as they used before. I think it was because of lack of exercises. This made the muscles contract creating pain when I walked a long distance. This is my first bike from Store Online but it if gorgeous you cannot even think of anything else.  With Exerpeutic Folding Magnetic Upright Bike With Pulse, my life is complete. The issue which I have put across is the only complaint that I can see in all the reviews meaning the manufacturers need to consider thin people. Not all people who need this bike are huge. Keep your body strong and healthy with Exerpeutic Folding Magnetic Upright Bike.
Ivar's Cabinet Shop, Inc. was established in 1966 by founder, Ivar Gundersen. Today, Ivar's Displays remains a fourth-generation, family owned business in Ontario, California on the West and Shelby, North Carolina on the East.
Released twenty years ago this week, Jackie Brown is often considered something of a minnow in comparison with the rest of Quentin Tarantino's output.  Beyond Robert DeNiro and Samuel L. Jackson, the film didn't feature any actors of especial note. Pam Grier, in the titular role, was primarily known for blaxploitation films of the '70s and was largely resigned to guest roles in TV shows such as Miami Vice, Crime Story and Knots Landing. Robert Forster, who played the reserved bail bondsman Max Cherry, was in a similar situation - turning up in the likes of Jake & The Fatman and Murder, She Wrote on no less than two episodes. Further down the cast list, Michael Keaton was primarily associated with Batman, Bridget Fonda had done low-rent thrillers like Single White Female, and Chris Tucker was more known for his stand-up comedy or a outsized cameo in The Fifth Element.  Yet, for all the lack of apparent starpower, Tarantino was able to mine the talent and come back with some of their best performances and, what's more, craft a deeply human story in a way that he hasn't done before or since. Look at the likes of Pulp Fiction, Reservoir Dogs, or even his later stuff like Kill Bill, Inglorious Basterds or The Hateful Eight. They're all great, sure, but none of them have any kind of subtlety to them. Even in Pulp Fiction's quieter moments, there's a sense that it's merely stalling for time to build up to something else.  Robert DeNiro, as Louis Gara, and Samuel L. Jackson, as Ordell Robbie  Inglorious Basterds was an over-the-top, gleefully violent romp through World War II that featured equally over-the-top performances from Brad Pitt and Christoph Waltz. Even the smaller strands, like with Daniel Bruh and Melanie Laurent, are done in a more obvious way. Bruhl's earnestness and, of course, Laurent literally burning a cinema to the ground as revenge. The Hateful Eight was more like a horror than a Western, taking inspiration from John Carpenter's The Thing and every locked-room thriller you can think of - mixed together with a complete lack of restraint in just about every way you can imagine.  Jackie Brown opens simply and unobtrusively, homaging The Graduate's understated opening credits with Bobby Womack's Across 110th Street in place of Simon & Garfunkel's Sound Of Silence. From there, we're shown Brown's situation - she's a forty-four year old air hostess, working for a low-cost Mexican airline and earning $16,000 "plus benefits", who's just trying to make a living. As each character is introduced, they're done so in a way that brings their motivations down to simple and relatable reasons. Samuel L. Jackson's character, Ordell Robbie, for all his swagger and ruthlessness, just wants to retire. Robert Forster's character leads a somewhat dull life that he's beginning to question, whilst the title character is riven with fears about starting over again in middle age. Throughout it all, there's a humanity to it and an authenticity that Tarantino's never fully recaptured.  Even in the soundtrack, it's the same thing. Most of the soundtrack is diegetic. Chris Tucker's character is shot dead to the smooth sounds of The Brothers Johnson after Samuel L. Jackson pops a tape into an 8-track. When we hear Randy Crawford's Street Life, it's being played on the radio in a Toyota Corolla. There's even a scene set in a music shop when Robert Forster picks up a Delfonics CD. While some of Tarantino's most recognisable setpieces have featured diegetic music - the ear removal scene from Reservoir Dogs, the dancing contest from Pulp Fiction - it's not something he's done much since, apart from maybe Death Proof or the infamous guitar scene in The Hateful Eight, which saw Kurt Russell destroy an authentic Martin guitar that was nearly 150 years old instead of a prop one.  Compared to the likes of Inglorious Basterds, Kill Bill or even Pulp Fiction, Tarantino lays out each scene in a much more reserved way. There's no black-and-white sequences, no cutaways or whip-pans, and there's even very little action to it. The most thrilling part of the film is the money exchange sequence, which is just a simple Steadicam shot following Pam Grier through a shopping centre. Jackie Brown was intended to be Tarantino's love letter to blaxploitation - the same films that Pam Grier made her name in, films like Coffy, Bucktown or Foxy Brown. Yet, when you look back over those films, there's a lot more visual flourish to them that Jackie
The Stormfiend is the ultimate and brutal combination of Clan Moulder bio-engineering and Clan Skyre sadistic techno-magi, hulking behemoths clad in bullet-proof metal armor and equipped with massive gatling cannons or swirling armored gauntlets. These monstrosities are amongst the greatest and most unstoppable monsters the Under-Empire has to offer.  Contents show]  Overvew  Rat Ogres are hulking flesh-beasts, stitched together out of component parts assembled or grown by Clan Moulder. They combine great strength and savage ferocity with the speed of a skaven. However, just because they were a successful breed and sold to nearly every Warlord Clan that could afford them did not mean that Clan Moulder was not still tinkering. Indeed, the flesh manufacturers of that clan were never satisfied, but were always seeking ways to make their creations ever more deadly.[1a]  In the end, it was Throt the Unclean, a Master Moulder of Hell Pit, that hit upon a solution. While others fixated on developing longer claws or grafting multiple arms, Throt set about getting to the root of the matter. Rat ogres did not lack in brawn or fighting potential: they lacked in mental capacity. They were small-minded creatures with a singular instinct to kill. It took much training from packmasters to lead them into battle, and even then the brute-beasts were difficult to control. Thus, what Throt attempted to improve was their woefully tiny brains, reasoning that if the beasts were smarter they could be given weapons to use.[1a]  The operations were dangerous work, for it was impossible to subdue a rat ogre - they were either viciously fighting with all their might or they were dead, with little to nothing in between. Even when they were chain-bound with heavy fetters, it was difficult to do brain work on the rat ogres. Worse still, the experiments were abject failures. The more the creature could think, the less violent it became. Throt was all too aware that the sole reason Clan Moulder sold so many rat ogres was due to the creatures' mindless aggression. To rob them of their kill-kill mentality was out of the question.[1a]  The next step for Throt was a logical one - If he could not make the beast smarter, could be fuse the packmaster on to the beast itself? Not surprisingly, those packmasters who were chosen to be permanently stitched into the back of a rat ogre, their brains and vital fluids connected, were profoundly unhappy. As these packmasters now controlled over-muscled hulking mauler-beasts, their dissatisfaction was all too apparent, and these experiments had to be cancelled. As there were no willing volunteers, Throt had little choice but to grow them himself.[1a]  Through gruesome and repugnant techniques, Throt grew the required subjects and merged other parts with captives or slaves. The result was a batch of scrawny and submissive Skaven with unusually large brains. Once permanently integrated into a warpstone-powered harness and rigged with coils and tubes, the Skaven's body would become more and more atrophied. Eventually, if it lived long enough, the Skaven would become little more than a shriveled husk with an auxiliary brain that could help steer the savage beast with which it was melded.[1a]  Early results were astoundingly successful - the rat ogres remained ferocious, but they could be briefly controlled by the far more sensible brain-creature hardwired into their backs. Unfortunately, there was a drawback; the rat ogres were able to use weapons now, but Clan Moulder quickly found out they had nothing with which to make their new creation any more destructive than its previous iteration had been. The rat ogres could wield the enormous clubs or oversized swords taken from defeated ogre tribes, but it made them no more dangerous then they had been with their own claws, fangs and boulder-like fists. There was only one place in all the Under-Empire where the best weapons available could be found: the warpforges of Clan Skryre.[1a]  Meaningful collaboration between the Skaven clans has always been rare, as neither side trusts the other. Even begun with good intentions, such brokered deals never end well, as the temptation to take advantage, swindle, or somehow cheat has always been an overwhelming urge for any Skaven. However, Clan Moulder's timing could not have been better when Throt arrived in Skavenblight seeking Clan Skryre aid.[1a]  Clan Skryre was seeking allies, for Lord Morskittar had long been planning the demise of the Grey Seers. The Lord of Decay considered support for his schemes, especially from the Greater Clans, to be vital. This being the case, Mors
BALTIMORE -- The next three Red Sox starters on deck against the Orioles here at Camden Yards: Rick Porcello (Friday), David Price (Saturday) and Chris Sale (Sunday).  Yes, Boston's Big Three all will pitch in the same series for the first time in 2017.  The Red Sox lost 7-5 to the Orioles in the series opener Thursday. Boston now holds just a half game lead over Baltimore for second place in the AL East standings.  We've been waiting to see these three aces go back-to-back-to-back ever since Boston traded for Sale on Dec. 6 at the Winter Meetings.  The time has arrived. And these three must lead the Red Sox during a tough road stretch with four vs. the Orioles and three against the AL East-leading Yankees.  Flash back to the Winter Meetings. Yankees GM Brian Cashman referred to the Red Sox as Major League Baseball's version of the NBA Golden State Warriors following the Sale trade.  "They have their (Kevin) Durant and their (Draymond) Green and (Klay) Thompson and (Steph) Curry," Cashman said back then to Yankees reporters.  Red Sox president of baseball operations Dave Dombrowski didn't directly replace David Ortiz's 38 homers, 48 doubles and 127 RBIs.  His goal was to strength the club in other areas: starting pitching (Sale), defense (Mitch Moreland) and bullpen (Tyler Thornburg who hasn't pitched yet).  It immediately became clear following the Sale trade this Red Sox team's success would hinge on the Big Three of Sale, Price and Porcello.  It starts this series after Price missed nearly the first two months with an elbow strain.  All these AL East games are important. The 2016 Red Sox won the division by posting a 43-33 record against AL East foes. The Orioles and Toronto went 40-36, New York went 35-41 and Tampa went 32-44.  Boston is two games under (10-12) against its AL East foes this year. The Sox need to play better, beginning the next three days with their three aces front and center.  1. New York 31-20 (.608)  2. Boston 29-24 (.547) 3 games behind  3. Baltimore 28 24 (.538) 3 1/2 games behind  4. Tampa Bay 29-27 (.518) 4 1/2 games behind  5. Toronto 26-28 (.481) 6 1/2 games behind  "You look at the standings, it's bunched up," Red Sox manager John Farrell said. "Toronto's gotten hot. They've closed the gap some. So when you look at our division up and down, it's annually a tough division. So we're right in the heat of it. We're right in the throes of the second-third of a season where you've got teams kind of hitting their stride. Everybody's dealt with oddities whether it's injuries, performance, what have you. But every game is important."
Sacha Modolo (Lampre-Merida) again confirmed that he is fully ready to add to his tally of Giro d'Italia stage wins by claiming his second stage win at the Tour of Turkey on the hilly penultimate stage of the race. Having survived two late climbs, he profited from an excellent lead-out from teammate Roberto Ferrari to narrowly hold off Manuel Belletti (Southeast) in a reduced bunch sprint, with Marco Zanotti (Parkhotel) taking another third place. Jose Goncalves (Caja Rural) retained the overall lead.  We have gathered several reactions.  Sacha Modolo after second win: My confidence is sky high  Recently selected for the team's line-up for the Giro d'Italia, Sacha Modolo demonstrated to be ready for the Pink Race by winning the 7th stage of the Tour of Turkey.  The sprint of the cyclist was perfect and it allowed him to beat Belletti, Zanotti and Stepniack, adding another success to the one he obtained in Alanya in the 4th stage.  "The profile of the course was not flat, we covered some climbs: they were not as demanding as yesterday's, however they could have been selective," Modolo explained. "Yesterday I had good feelings while climbing, the sports directors told me that I should focus my attention on the top result because I had a good condition and so I did.  "During the race, my legs were great and, thanks to the support of my team mates, I did not spend energy in the approach to the climbs. I could reach the summit of the last climb at 8 km to go with much energy which allowed me to make a very fast sprint. I began my progression in the right moment, I did not make a mistake as I had done in the 5th stage, when I started too early. I'm happy with the victory and I'm satisfied in view of the Giro d'Italia".  "Today was perfect. The other day was perfect too, although the finish today probably suited me even better. A climb, a descent, a sprint: exactly what makes me a winner. It was not only me today by the whole team that made me a winner. Ferrari led me out in the sprint.  "We had a lot of bad luck in March and April. We all crashed in Milan Sanremo, but now it looks like luck is back on our side. Just before the Giro is a good time to come good.  "We knew the Tour of Turkey was a good way to prepare for the Giro from last year. I did the Tour of Turkey and then we went all well: with Ferrari and Richeze, we had a very good Giro. The only problem is, this year, I'll have only one day at home between Turkey and the Giro, and it takes a lot of flights to get to Istanbul and then to Cappadocia. We have two more flights tomorrow, then there's the flight to Holland, then from Holland to Italy. It makes for a lot of travelling. I suppose that I can rest after the Giro.  "I've been coming here for six years, since 2010, and I sincerely like the race. This year there were some doubts, with the change of organisation, but it has gone all well. You can't tell the difference between one year and the next. There has been more stress in the bunch because of the hard stage on Day Two, which we were not used to, and the wind and rain on stage 3. But it has been a beautiful Giro d'Italia.  "My confidence is sky high, I don't feel inferior to [Greipel, Kittel or Ewan) as a sprinter, but as a team we are not at their level. I'll only have Ferrari to lead me out, so we'll have to try to do what we can. We've lost Richeze, who was important. On the very flat stages it will be difficult, but the Giro isn't easy, with long and nervous stages, so perhaps I can do something on thje more demanding stages.   Przemysław Niemiec (Lampre – Merida) added: "Before the start of the stage, we decided that we'd ride the final climb flat out to avoid any kind of attack. Unfortunately there was a head wind and it was very hard to climb. I also told the team that I'd put myself at the service of Sacha [Modolo] to thank him for the work he did for me yesterday. He brilliantly won the stage today. I'm very happy for him and the team.  "The Tour of Turkey is a beautiful preparation for the Giro. We race in the heat, the roads are nice and wide. There are flat stages, there are hills as well
The Medic or Assault Specialist is the tritaginest in the Battlefield Friends series. He appears to be the most laid-back among the squad, he does not yell at the Noob as often as his other squadmates do, and actually is more encouraging toward the Noob's attempted grasp of how the world of Battlefield works, during the Season 2 premier "Chopper Expert", the Medic had some confidence in the Noob's newfound ability to fly to an extent (although, he does show some sarcasm when something goes wrong in the game and that is usually pointed towards the Noob). In addition to his above average patience and mellow attitude, the Medic is shown to be a team player. In the "Silent Sniper" he watches over the Recon's "six" while he snipes, in "Full Tank" he effectively serves as a gunner for the squad's tank, killing an enemy that attempted to place C4 on the tank. His aptitude in infantry combat is displayed in "Claymore Specialist" by his ability to singlehandedly eliminate an entire squad of enemy medics.  Early on in the series, the Medic was depicted as a caucasian male. However, when the "beta tests" come back, the Medic is made into an African-American male. This reference goes back to how in the actual Battlefield 3 beta, the American Assault player was caucasian, and in the final release, he is an African-American.  Contents show]  Trivia Edit  In the episode "Closet Colonel" the Closet colonel swapped classes with him, making him an engineer.  Unlike the other squadmates,he shows to have a bit more patience to The Noob  The Medic almost always wields the M16A3. His weapon of preference in BF4 has changed to an AEK971.  The Medic used to be white skinned.  In Air Superiority, he gets his jet stuck. He is in space at the end of the episode. This is because in the game, flying a jet high enough will freeze the player in place, forcing him/her to commit suicide in order to get back in the game.  According to Battleloggers, his name is Do_r_a_l_e_o_u_s ,which is a character from Doraleous and Associates.  Unlike a squad of medics on the RU team, he apparently got the notification that the FAMAS had been patched. This is shown by the sticky darts on his helmet in the episode "Claymore Specialist", which is a reference to the term 'Nerf', which means to deduct weapon efficiency.  In Administrator, he got banned by The Administrator for using an 870MCS in the server, this is due to many server admins banning weapons such as shotguns due to them being considered overpowered.  As well as The Sniper, The Medic has admitted to having sex, which may indicate he has a wife, as seen in the episode 'Colonel 100'.  In season 4, the medic wears a tan uniform, a light green vest, and a darker cross. He doesn't use a mask and goggles like the actual in-game assault, and still stays as an African-American male.  In "Commander Online", he ragequits from the server after The Noob kills him with an ammo drop and vehicle drop.  In Finding A Server, he alongside The Engineer are on the CN side for the first time, although this is offscreen. Unlike The Engineer, he doesn't imitate a Chinese accent.  In Phantom Bow he is seen with 3 poison arrows in his helmet and advises against using them, due to them dealing less damage than the standard arrow.  It is implied that he plays Call of Duty, as seen in Waiting on a New Game when The Engineer calls him out on it after he notices him wearing a pink skirt.  He doesn't care that The Noob unlocked the Dino Mask, by saying "big fucking deal."  In Teamspeak, he turns Teamspeak on, which causes his head to explode.  In Kill Cam, he was apparently killed by a Gunship using C4.  He doesn't like spawnkilling, as seen in Spawn Killers.  In Rail Gun, he is seen using it alongside The Engineer, and gets defensive over it when The Recon asks to try it.  Gallery Edit  Quotes Edit  "Once you med-pack you never go back."  -Season 3, Girl Gamer Edit  "We're a fucking beached whale now."  -Season 4, Attack Boat Edit  "Well that's a first, killed by a fucking ammo drop."  -Season 4, Commander Online Edit  "What's that supposed to mean!?"
This is a book that I bought over a month ago and had been meaning to read ASAP. Finally, I had a gap in my schedule and sat down with the paperback. I've never considered myself all that much of a fan of horror, probably because I assume that means there will be overdone violence/gore for the sake of shock value, stupid characters making stupid choices that leave them meat for a killer, or child death (I tend to avoid books/movies with that as there's quite enough of that in the news.) While there are allusions to murdered children in this book, it's off-camera and you don't 'get to know' any of the victims per se prior to that, which while unsettling isn't past my limit. There was only enough of it to underscore the type of creatures the witches are in this setting. Anyway, here is my Review:  Synopsis:  From the award-winning author of the Outlaw King series comes another harrowing adventure in the grand tradition of Stephen King, Clive Barker, and Charlaine Harris.  Robin Martine has come a long way. She's not your usual college-age girl. More often than not, Robin's washing a load of gory clothes at the laundromat, or down at the lake throwing hatchets at pumpkins. She lives in an old van, collects swords, and dyes her mohawk blue. Also, she kills witches for a living on YouTube. You see, Robin's life was turned upside down by those hideous banshees from Hell. She spent high-school in a psych ward, drugged out of her head for telling the cops her mother Annie was murdered with magic. Magic from a witch named Marilyn Cutty. After a three-year warpath across America, she's come home to end Cutty for good.  But she'll have to battle hog-monsters, a city full of raving maniacs, and a killer henchman called the "Serpent" if she wants to end the coven's reign over the town of Blackfield once and for all.  My thoughts:  Malus Domestica by SA Hunt is a masterful tale of supernatural horror told with an ensemble cast. The mythology/setting that he's created is fantastic, deep, and creepy as all hell. This author has a gift for description that paints vivid (often disturbingly so) images in the mind. One caveat―if you are a cat lover, this book is going to be quite disturbing. Some parts were hard to read.  The description on the jacket makes it sound like Robin is the "main" character, but in the beginning of the book she feels more like an equal part of a large cast. At about the 70% mark, she takes a more prominent role as the story brings the multiple characters together as all of them are affected in one way or another by an ancient and powerful coven of witches who dwell in Blackfield, GA.  Robin is a witch hunter. The Blackfield coven killed her mother prior to the events of the story when Robin was still a child, an event that has left deep emotional wounds. After years in a psychiatric facility (child Robin made the mistake of telling the authorities witches did it), an enigmatic occultist finds and trains her to do one thing: kill witches. Problem is, killing things that are already dead is often a tricky (and painful) task.  Increasing hallucinations of a strange creature, dreams of her mother, and an inexorable pull to return draw Robin back to her childhood home. It is time for her to face her demons once and for all.  This book has a lot of characters, but unlike what can often happen with such a large cast, I never felt as though I got lost as to who is who. Each character is portrayed vividly, from the minor characters (like the child that decides to hide in the wrong car) to the primary characters like Robin, Wayne, Joel, and Kenway – and of course the witches. You know you are reading the work of a gifted author when you have been shown how awful and evil the primary antagonist can be – yet in a quiet moment where they are talking to Robin, you start to wonder if the old woman has a point… maybe it is Robin who's misguided. Maybe they could bury the hatchet… and you almost want them to. THAT is a great story.  I don't, as a general rule, read a lot of novels classified as 'horror,' but I decided to jump on this one based on his previous Outlaw King books. I'm glad I did. This is a long book – and I still got so caught up in it that I finished it one day. Hollywood needs to stop with the remakes and start reading some of SA Hunt's books.  This book will make you change your mind on self-published authors. The formatting and editing were near perfect. If I
The New England Patriots didn't make a draft selection until the third round this spring when they snagged defensive end Derek Rivers. The Super Bowl champs will likely be without their top pick for the season.  NFL Network Insider Ian Rapoport reported an initial MRI revealed Rivers tore his ACL and sprained his LCL, per a source informed of the situation. The rookie will get a second opinion to confirm surgery is needed, per Rapoport.  ESPN first reported the news.  Rivers was sent back to Boston on Wednesday for tests after injuring himself during a joint practice with the Houston Texans.  The Patriots selected Rivers with the No. 83 overall pick. The 6-foot-4, 248-pound Youngstown St. product compiled 173 total tackles and 37.5 sacks in four seasons. Rivers displayed good burst at the college level and the ability to disrupt the passer. His versatility to play defensive end or stand up as an outside linebacker meshed perfectly with the Patriots' defensive preferences.  The Pats were already thin at pass rusher before Rivers' injury. The blow to their top draft choice, coupled with Rob Ninkovich's retirement, makes the group even shallower heading into the 2017 season.  Here are other injury notes we're tracking on Friday:  1. Atlanta Falcons wide receiver Julio Jones will not play Sunday vs. the Steelers, coach Dan Quinn told reporters. The receiver is still recovering from offseason foot surgery.  2. Seattle Seahawks starting left tackle George Fant suffered a right knee injury during the second quarter against the Vikings and was carted off the field. Medical personnel fitted Fant with an air cast on his leg before he was transported to the locker room. Coach Pete Carroll said after the game that Fant will need surgery and that his season is in jeopardy. Rapoport reported early Saturday that Fant suffered a season-ending ACL tear.  Seahawks tight end Marcus Lucas suffered an ankle injury in the second quarter and was ruled out from returning a short time later.  Seattle rookie wide receiver Amara Darboh left in the first half to be evaluated for a concussion and did not return.  After the Seahawks' 20-13 win over the Vikings, Carroll said running back C.J. Prosise didn't play due to a minor groin issue and tight end Jimmy Graham sat out with back spasms.  3. NFL Network's Tom Pelissero reported Cam Newton will not play in the Carolina Panthers' preseason game against the Titans on Saturday as he recovers from offseason shoulder surgery. The quarterback, though, is throwing more and feels fine, a source told Pelissero.  #Panthers are in Nashville already. Another source said Cam wants to play, but they're being cautious. No rush. — Tom Pelissero (@TomPelissero) August 18, 2017  4. Chicago Bears starting running back Jordan Howard suffered a corneal abrasion (eye) during Friday's walkthrough, the team announced. Howard did not travel with the team to Arizona for Chicago's game Saturday against the Cardinals. However, the Bears consider the injury to be minor, a source informed of the situation told Pelissero.  5. Pittsburgh Steelers linebacker Ryan Shazier (hamstring) returned to practice, according to multiple reports.  6. Tampa Bay Buccaneers offensive tackle Demar Dotson suffered a groin injury against the Jacksonville Jaguars on Thursday and will undergo an MRI on Saturday, coach Dirk Koetter said.  7. Buffalo Bills safety Bacarri Rambo (hamstring) returned to practice after sitting out Thursday's preseason game against the Philadelphia Eagles.
(updated below)  The contrast between (a) how Paul Ryan is depicted by worshipful Republicans and media figures alike -- as a principled fiscal conservative and advocate of Randian self-sufficiency -- and the reality of what he's done in his life is as stark as it is typical. The American Right has an amazing ability to lionize leaders whose lives are the precise antithesis of the political values that define their image.  For the last decade, conservatives transformed George Bush and Dick Cheney into the embodiments of warrior courage, even though they both scampered away from combat, letting others fight and die for them in a war they both supported. The same is true of almost every leading right-wing super-patriot tough-guy: John Bolton, Bill Kristol, Newt Gingrich, Rush Limbaugh -- and Mitt Romney. Somehow, when the authoritarians on the Right search for icons of manly warrior power to venerate, they find only those who like to melodramatically play-act as such, but who ran away when it came time to actually perform. Indeed, such figures dress themselves up with extra-flamboyant trappings of faux Toughness for the same reason female impersonators have long favored over-the-top feminine costumes and gaudy make-up: the more one lacks an attribute which one wishes to project, the more extreme one must be in pretending.  Thus do we have Paul Ryan -- Randian Super-Hero of Individual Self-Reliance and Working Class Warrior against government debt, waste, and intrusiveness -- whose actual life is a testament to the precise opposite values. As Charles Pierce and Joan Walsh document, not only was Ryan raised in a rich family and not only has he spent his entire adult life on the public payroll, but he has relied, and continues to rely, on various forms of government help in climbing every rung on his educational and careerist ladder. His claim to fiscal conservatism is even more laughable, as he voted FOR virtually every program that has piled up debt over the past decade, including the Iraq War (not just its commencement but its limitless continuation), the Wall Street bailout, Medicare Part D, Endless War in Afghanistan, and -- in the midst of all of that -- Bush tax cuts.  Perhaps most ludicrous of all is the notion that he's some sort of advocate for restrained federal government power. As Antiwar.com's John Glaser documented today, Ryan has continuously voted in favor of measures to expand all sorts of intrusive federal power, including making the PATRIOT Act permanent, enacting the Military Commissions Act to provide indefinite detention with no habeas corpus rights, implementing the Protect America Act to massively expand the U.S. Government's power to eavesdrop on Americans without warrants, supporting a federal Constitutional amendment to deny same-sex couples the right to marry along with a law banning the ability of gay couples in D.C. to adopt children and the continuation of Don't Ask/Don't Tell, a Constitutional amendment to criminalize flag burning, and almost every proposed measure to restrict abortion rights.  The ACLU -- which has been continuously scathing in its criticisms of President Obama's civil liberties record -- issued a report on the potential Vice Presidential nominees (including Joe Biden) entitled "A Heartbeat Away from the Presidency, Light Years from Civil Liberties," and said yesterday that Ryan has "uniformly harmful views on five key civil liberties issues including a humane immigration policy, LGBT equality, reproductive rights, torture and indefinite detention and fair voting access" (he did, however, vote against the NDAA's indefinite detention provisions, signed into law by President Obama at the end of 2011, as well as for a bill to include "sexual orientation" in the list of factors that cannot be legally used in job hiring). Whatever one wants to say about Ryan's record, it is the very opposite of constraining the power of the federal government to intrude into the lives of individuals; indeed, it's a testament to massive expansion of intrusive federal government power in almost every realm.  This dynamic -- in which the defining image of partisan icons is the antithesis of their personal reality -- is, of course, also prevalent among Democrats: a point I note not to fulfill a both-sides-are-guilty obligation, but because it's indisputably true. Obama supporters pretended that his 2008 campaign was some sort of populist uprising even as Wall Street overwhelmingly supported his candidacy. Now, especially with the selection of Ryan, they're going to act as though his re-election is all about shielding Medicare from cuts even though, as Matt Stoller documents today (citing this), Obama already tried to cut not only Medicare but also Medicaid and Social Security, and clearly intends more of the same with a second term (along with his ongoing empowerment of America's most extreme corporatists). And, of course, the "chickenhawk" insult that was so popular among Democrats during the Bush years has completely disappeared, as they now celebrate the so-called
A religious row has broken out over Mars One's plans to send volunteers to the Red Planet on a one-way mission that will be televised for the world's entertainment.  In April the Dutch group Mars One announced plans to send four people to a Martian habitat by 2023, with more settlers arriving every two years. The estimated $6bn cost of the trip will be covered by the sale of TV rights. But now the General Authority of Islamic Affairs and Endowment (GAIAE) has issued a fatwa forbidding devout Muslims from taking part.  "Such a one-way journey poses a real risk to life, and that can never be justified in Islam," the committee said, The Khaleej Times reports. "There is a possibility that an individual who travels to planet Mars may not be able to remain alive there, and is more vulnerable to death."  Up to 500 Muslims are reported to have applied for the Mars One mission, and the GAIAE indicated that some of these people may be trying to escape punishment for crimes here on Earth, or avoid confronting God when they die. It said such efforts were futile since God was everywhere, both on Mars and Earth.  The fatwa, or legal ruling, is the historical form of guidance handed down to those following the Islamic faith, based on a writings in the Quran, or on the accounts of the teachings and practices of the Prophet Mohammed (the Sunnah), or from religious doctrine decided by Muslim clerics.  "Protecting life against all possible dangers and keeping it safe is an issue agreed upon by all religions and is clearly stipulated in verse 4/29 of the Holy Quran: Do not kill yourselves or one another. Indeed, Allah is to you ever Merciful," said the GAIAE's President Professor Dr Farooq Hamada.  The Dutch team behind Mars One begs to differ. In a statement the group said that exploration was a long-standing Muslim tradition and the Quran encouraged adherents to explore the wonders of God's creation.  The group says the mission is not suicidal, since advance missions will deliver to Mars all the necessary ingredients for life before the first humans arrive. This will also give Mars One time to practice their landings using unmanned vessels to reduce the risk of crashing the astronauts onto the Red Planet's surface.  "Mars One respectfully requests GAIAE to cancel the fatwa and make the greatest Rihla, or journey, of all times open for Muslims too," said Mars One.  "They can be the first Muslims to witness the signs of God's creation in heaven, drawing upon the rich culture of travel and exploration of early Islam. The lives and journey of the first Mars settlers will tell us more about our place in the universe than any other humans before us."  In the meantime the team notes that the fatwa only prohibits Muslims from going on the actual mission, not from applying to take part and undergo the eight years of training required for the trip. The team vowed to work with the GAIAE to assuage its concerns in the meantime. ®
About LUS  Director's Message  Terry Huval, P.E.  Bonjour et bienvenue à Lafayette Utilities System!  LUS has played a vital role in the Lafayette community for more than 100 years, and our commitment continues to grow. Our employees are devoted to providing quality, reliable utility services to every customer.  We take pride in our dedication to safety as well as our community involvement. As a publicly owned utility, we are honored to provide low rates to our community and help to make it a better place to work and live.  From electric services to fiber to your home, we are steadfast in improving the way you live. I hope that every experience with us is informative and filled with Southern Hospitality!  If you have any questions or comments, please contact us at (337) 291-8280.  Merci pour votre visite sur le site internet de LUS.
Photo of Fredrick Foote by Greg Dohler via Gazette.net  Gunners in Sevastopol, Ukraine, had unhinged the gates of hell on a battalion of British troops. On October 25, 1854, cannonballs flattened dozens of men a pop, and warhorses sank to their hocks in the splatter. When the smoke cleared 110 were dead, making the Battle of Balaclava one of the most notorious suicide missions of the Crimean War.  Six weeks after the massacre Alfred, Lord Tennyson, Britain's poet laureate, hailed the soldiers' valor in 55 lines of verse and enshrined them in legend. A tragic ballad with a biting sense of futility ("Theirs not to reason why, / Theirs but to do and die"), "The Charge of the Light Brigade" became the ambivalent banner cry of this and so many subsequent wars of questionable cause. But Rudyard Kipling's postscript to the poem, "The Last of the Light Brigade," written years later, went nearly unnoticed. His largely forgotten effort considered the battle's forgotten survivors, who, "limping and lean and forlorn," had inherited from their country nothing but shell shock, pained deformity, and crippling unemployment. Though Kipling wrote the essential poem about Crimea, Tennyson wrote the crowd favorite, as the public wants the battle but not the aftermath, like a child loath to clean up its mess.  If the war poet Frederick Foote has a mission, it would be to unite Tennyson's gift for elegy with Kipling's sense of debt. His debut collection, Medic Against Bomb, has enjoyed considerable acclaim since its quiet release last fall, receiving the Grayson Books Poetry Prize, earning applause from the National Endowment for the Arts and the Library of Congress, and being named by the Progressive as a best book of the year. An account of Foote's time as a US Navy doctor in Iraq and Afghanistan, the book is a tonic for the genre. A relic of the sickbay rather than the battlefield, it prefers the guts of war to the glory, lamenting the wounded on both sides with Hippocratic impartiality.  Like Kipling, Foote knows he is here not to eulogize but to heal. And his interest in the intersection of art and war doesn't end with his poetry collection. After studying humanities at the University of Chicago, Foote trained in neurology at Georgetown and Yale. When he returned from Iraq and Afghanistan he dedicated himself to finding new ways of treating veterans beset with brain injury and post-traumatic stress disorder. His approach has been auspiciously atypical. With military funding, Foote founded the Epidaurus Project, which researches and advocates the use of holistic medicine throughout the armed forces, and his writing group, the Warrior Poets Project, puts verse at the center of this practice. In other words, his writerly endeavors are inseparable from his pastoral care, devoted as it is to the therapeutic power of art. If his work as a poet focuses on the literature of medicine, his work as a doctor focuses on the medicine of literature.  I recently spoke with Foote to learn more about his efforts. What follows is a conversation on the value of war poetry, the healing power of literature, and his scientific research into art's effects on the brain and its place in the hospitals of the future.  VICE: Have you always written poetry, or did you find your voice on the front lines?  Captain Frederick Foote: I always wrote it, but more urgently after treating the wounded—both American and Iraqi—on the hospital ship Comfort during the 2003 invasion of Iraq. That was the origin of many of the poems in the book, which focuses on the wounded of the conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan.  In a poem about the Comfort, you tell the detached, emotionally AWOL generals to "come live two weeks on our ward, with the harm we have here— / You'll be mutinous then—and as pacifist as we." Have you always been a pacifist? How has this complicated your identity as a member of the armed forces?  This is the place to note I'm retired Navy—after 29 years of service—and not a federal employee, so nothing I say represents the views of the US government.  In any case, my breed of pacifism is "Hate the war but love and honor the warrior." For now, unfortunately, we may need to accept the existence of conflict as necessary if we are to reach justice.  As Robert Gates has said, some of the biggest pacifists in Washington wear uniforms. I'm one of those odd, seldom-promoted intellectuals whom the military keeps on the shelf in case of need. When they needed new approaches for treating brain injury and PTSD—the main health problems afflicting veterans of the current wars—they dusted me off and put me to work at Walter Reed, our
Author Message  ZWEIHÄNDER  Administrator   Joined: 06 Aug 2009  Posts: 1272   Posted: Thu Sep 08, 2016 3:12 pm Post subject: Conversion: Warhammer Fantasy RPG   Warhammer: Racial & Cultural Traits of the Old World & Beyond  http://www.kalevalahammer.com/2017/06/zweihander-rpg-warhammer-racial.html   Warhammer: Knights & Templars  http://www.kalevalahammer.com/2017/12/zweihander-rpg-warhammer-knights.html   'Night of Blood' Adventure  https://grimandperilous.com/night-of-blood-a-wfrp-1e-to-zweihander-total-conversion/   'The Oldenhaller Contract' Adventure  https://docs.google.com/document/d/1PMSuCUjeNUaNuYd1cTotuyBKJyHj_Y4lpjmivb_ZXwQ/edit?usp=sharing   'Thousand Thrones' Adventure  https://docs.google.com/document/d/1z1n7xGqL_BXGJ-_037U4_NNGNKL4d9FlZsfByqGVitA/edit?usp=sharing  _________________  Daniel Fox  Author of ZWEIHÄNDER Grim & Perilous RPG, a Warhammer Fantasy Roleplay retroclone  http://grimandperilous.com Unofficial Warhammer Fantasy Roleplay To Zweihänder Conversions archived here:http://www.kalevalahammer.com/2017/06/zweihander-rpg-warhammer-racial.htmlhttp://www.kalevalahammer.com/2017/12/zweihander-rpg-warhammer-knights.html_________________Daniel FoxAuthor of ZWEIHÄNDER Grim & Perilous RPG, a Warhammer Fantasy Roleplay retroclone   Last edited by ZWEIHÄNDER on Fri Dec 29, 2017 9:45 am; edited 6 times in total  ZWEIHÄNDER  Administrator   Joined: 06 Aug 2009  Posts: 1272   Posted: Thu Sep 08, 2016 3:18 pm Post subject: Re: Converting WFRP to ZWEIHANDER Ceodryn wrote:   - It seems currency was based on WFRP2, is that right? Can we take any WFRP2 adventure and keep the currency/rewards similar?   - How to adapt corruption, or the idea of corruption, from warpstone, or figthing mutants/daemons/beastmen, particularly from WFRP3, into Zwei? -> Would the GM use the Zwei corruption? It doesnt seem to fit as it is more of an emotional corruption, than a physical corruption   Adam is going to chime in on the Professions conversions, but you will find easy analogues between the two systems.   The currency is in fact the same, but uses a more "sane" approach to how wages work. You can use currency as-is.   Temporary Corruption is a catch-all in ZWEI; being neither mental or physical - it's emotional strain. Corruption leads to Chaos Ranks, which then turn into mental Insanities, mental/physical Addictions and physical Mutations. It's very flexible and easily backed into WFRPG.   Wytchstone (pg315) is corruptive, as is contact with the supernatural, beastmen, demons, etc... (pg 388).  _________________  Daniel Fox  Author of ZWEIHÄNDER Grim & Perilous RPG, a Warhammer Fantasy Roleplay retroclone  http://grimandperilous.com Adam is going to chime in on the Professions conversions, but you will find easy analogues between the two systems.The currency is in fact the same, but uses a more "sane" approach to how wages work. You can use currency as-is.Temporary Corruption is a catch-all in ZWEI; being neither mental or physical - it's emotional strain. Corruption leads to Chaos Ranks, which then turn into mental Insanities, mental/physical Addictions and physical Mutations. It's very flexible and easily backed into WFRPG.Wytchstone (pg315) is corruptive, as is contact with the supernatural, beastmen, demons, etc... (pg 388)._________________Daniel FoxAuthor of ZWE
Until very recently, CBD has lived in the shadow of its infamous cannabinoid cousin, THC, which is widely known as the high-inducing compound in Marijuana. However, extensive research is now being conducted on CBD and its medical potential, which has opened the doors for antipsychotic, anticancer and antiinflammatory treatment options among MANY others. One after another, scientists are publishing studies that prove CBD is the most dynamic and useful of the cannabinoids as far as promotion of proper function of the systems of the body is concerned.  These are 5 of the most astounding properties of CBD.  There are Several Medical Benefits of CBD, Let's Have a Glance!!  Inhibition of cancer cell growth  Various studies have supported this claim. Via Proapoptotic action (apoptosis is how your body gets rid of cells that no longer work correctly, like dead skin cells), Cannabidiol, Tetrahydrocannabinol, Cannabigerol and Cannabichromene in that order are highly effective in reducing the growth of tumors in both rats and cancerous human prostate cells. Research is still being conducted, but the most popular understanding is that these cannabinoids stimulate the body's natural process of killing cells that are not functioning at their highest potential or that are functioning improperly. Unlike traditional chemo, which is poison that kills both healthy and cancerous cells during a specific stage of replication, and thus only works as long as cancer cells are replicating more frequently than healthy cells, cannabinoids promote the body's natural immune response to cells that are doing something other than what they should be doing normally, thus facilitating the eradication of tumors.  Reduces Pain  One of the most common reasons that people start using marijuana recreationally is because they recognize that in addition to its psychoactive tendencies, it also is a functional pain reliever. People who have issues with chronic pain especially are observed to rely on cannabinoid products to deal with their pain and eliminate the source of it, which is most commonly inflammation. Inflammation is the body's natural response to injury, flooding the area with blood and nutrients to aid in its rehabilitation. However, inflammation opens a whole new range of secondary problems including pain and discomfort. By stimulating the affinity of nutrients to the area that is injured, CBD causes a negative feedback to the inflammatory reaction, because the nutrients that inflammation would bring to the injury are already present.  Anti-Anxiety  Anxiety and PTSD have affected over 40 million adults in the USA. CBD oils and other products are now preferred over what are essentially the tranquilizers Valium and Xanax to treat this health condition. The effects of CBD are observed thoroughly by experts and various studies have proved its efficacy as a dependable option for mental disorders, as it is an α2-adrenergic receptor agonist and a 5-HT1A receptor antagonist, the two receptors in the human brain responsible respectively for mediating Adrenaline and Serotonin, both of which are related to anxiety, depression, insomnia, and many other mental disorders when they are imbalanced.  Enhances the immune system  Phytocannabinoids have been found to possess enormous capacity to balance and augment our immune system. Cannabinoid products taken on a daily basis can do wonders to regulate the immune system through many mechanisms of action, most of which are related to increasing the body's recognition of foreign and potentially dangerous entities, including cancer cells.  Suppresses muscle spasms  With chemically antispasmodic properties, CBD is hailed by athletes from every sport. Highly preferred as a supplement, CBD oils have been proven to suppress muscle spasms and overall soreness by "lubricating" the system of potassium and calcium pumps in muscle tissue.  There is an vast array of benefits of CBD, especially when it's coupled with the entourage effect perceived when several cannabinoids enter the bloodstream simultaneously. Make sure you consult your doctor before treating diagnosed or undiagnosed diseases with doses of CBD. Diseases like diabetes, schizophrenia, epilepsy, etc. are some of the more severe diseases that can be treated by CBD, but only when it is used properly.
mulchling:  sufferclown:  hey, uh… hey blizzard… would you, uh, kindly explain, what the Fuck this is i'm looking at right now  I can't believe they were too lazy to make an actual native hero so they just gave us 2 pharra skins that look like a racist football team logo and thought that was ok. she has black hair right like it's fine
Thousands of computer users may be without Internet access Monday after a deadline expired for a temporary fix to a malicious software scam shut down by the FBI last year.  What is it?  Millions of computers were infected with the so-called "Internet Doomsday" virus used in the hacking scam, which redirected Internet searches through DNS servers used by the scammers. (Who, in turn, allegedly netted $14 million in bogus advertising revenue.) After U.S. and Estonian authorities busted the malware ring last November, a federal judge ordered that the FBI use temporary servers while the malware victims' PCs were repaired. The temporary servers shut down at 12:01 am EDT Monday, meaning anyone using a computer still infected with the virus will likely lose Internet access.  "Connectivity will be lost to the Internet PERIOD," Symantec, the online security firm, said in a blog post. "If your computer is still using DNS entries that are pointing to the FBI servers on July 9, you will lose TOTAL access to the Internet. No connecting to the office from home, no updating Facebook, nothing until the DNS settings are fixed."  How many computers have it?  It's unclear how widespread the "blackout" will be. According to a working group set up by security experts, more than 300,000 computers remained infected as of June 11, including 69,000 in the United States. Last week, 245,000 computers were said to be still infected with the so-called Alureon virus, according online security firm Deteque, including 45,355 U.S. machines.  Wired estimates 64,000 U.S. users and an additional 200,000 users outside the United States are still infected with the malware, "despite repeated warnings in the news, e-mail messages sent by ISPs and alerts posted by Google and Facebook." According to Internet Identity, another IT security firm, "12 percent of all Fortune 500 companies and four percent of 'major' U.S. federal agencies are still infected with DNSChanger malware."  But it's also unclear how many of those machines are still in use.  What you can do  According to Reuters, U.S. Internet providers including AT&T and Time Warner Cable "have made temporary arrangements so that their customers will be able to access the Internet using the address of the rogue DNS servers." And the problem, security experts say, is relatively easy to fix.  "It's a very easy one to fix," Gunter Ollmann, vice president of research for security company Damballa, told the news service. "There are plenty of tools available."  Online security firms, Facebook and the FBI are offering free diagnostic checks for users whose computers may be infected. Here are links to several:  • Malware check: http://dns-ok.us/  • FBI: https://forms.fbi.gov/check-to-see-if-your-computer-is-using-rogue-DNS  • DNS Changer Working Group: http://www.dcwg.org/  • Facebook: http://www.facebook.com/notes/facebook-security/notifying-dnschanger-victims/10150833689760766  • McAfee: http://www.mcafee.com/dnscheck  Of course, that hasn't stopped local media outlets from breathless reporting on the looming "blackout."  "Monday morning," Alabama's WAAY-TV reported last week, "hundreds of thousands of Internet enthusiasts could wake up to find nothing but a dark, empty computer screen."  The media hype over a potential "blackout" threatens "to obscure what has been a highly successful effort--one of few to date--to stamp out a global online scam and malware infestation," Paul Roberts wrote on Threatpost.com. Six people were arrested in Estonia and charged with Internet fraud in the sting. A seventh, who was living in Russia, remains at large.
LEROY PERCIVAL | Central-Coast Queensland Folk-Rock Editor | CONTACT  An outspoken local and avid reader of the works of Murdoch, has come back to his gated community in The Gap today, confident he's boosted his favourite parties numbers substantially.  The humble optimism came after Cooke pulled a two-hour stint on the corner of Waterworks and Settlement Roads this morning. In a solid effort, he waved to the neighbourhood's peak hour commuters, who no doubt appreciated the sentiment.  As tensions rise in QLD's political landscape, Cooke grabbed his camping chair and busted out a spiffy new A-frame, perching himself right amongst the action, in a brave and noble effort.  His decision to hit the front-line came as concerns about the "PC Brigade" began to rise amongst his Sunday men's cycling group during their post-ride coffee.  "This bloody PC brigade" said Cooke, "I don't like the bloody PC brigade. Those PC brigader people. PC brigade. Don't like em at all."  Not getting much else out of Cooke, we approached other members of his cycling club at their favourite coffee spot. Cooke's mate, Phillip Collins, echoed his concerns somewhat.  "This bloody PC brigade, they're making us uncomfortable" he said, adjusting his penis and testicles inside his imperative cycling suit.  "We've avoided all these silly little issues our whole lives. Where not gonna start letting them bother us now"  "This bloody PC brigade. It's getting on our nerves and we really should feel comfortable in our own state". He then asked "are you reading that?" before running off into a corner with the Courier Mail.
The State Department is reopening an internal investigation of possible mishandling of classified information by Hillary Clinton and top aides.  Spokesman John Kirby says the emails probe is restarting now that the Justice Department isn't pursuing a criminal prosecution. The State Department suspended its review in April to avoid interfering with the FBI's inquiry.  Advertisement  Kirby set no deadline for the investigation's completion.  Clinton was secretary of state until early 2013. Most of her top advisers left shortly thereafter.  But Kirby said this week former officials can still face "administrative sanctions." The most serious is loss of security clearances, which could complicate Clinton's naming of a national security team if she becomes president.  Beyond the Democratic front-runner, the probe is most likely examining confidants Cheryl Mills, Jake Sullivan and Huma Abedin.   AlertMe
Michael Vincent reported this story on Wednesday, July 8, 2015 08:26:44  ASHLEY HALL: Relief, elation, vindication - just some of the words used today by women who accuse the American comedian Bill Cosby of sexually abusing them.   They were responding to a stunning revelation from a previously sealed 2005 court document.   That document revealed that the comedian admitted under oath that he'd obtained strong sedatives with the intention of using them to procure sex.   North America correspondent Michael Vincent reports.   MICHAEL VINCENT: It maybe a single word on a 10 year old legal document but the word is "yes".   That was Bill Cosby's response to the question: "Was it in your mind that you were going to use these Quaaludes for young women that you wanted to have sex with?"   The use of sedative drugs followed by a sexual assault has been the central allegation by more than two dozen women who have come forth to accuse the comedian over the past year.   This document has been hailed as vindication by those women, including Barbara Bowman.   BARBARA BOWMAN: It was a glorious moment. It-it made my heart skip a beat. It was just, it was quite a moment to say finally, finally somebody is listening and now everyone is listening and knows the truth.   MICHAEL VINCENT: The statute of limitations has run out on many of the cases that these women have brought forward, which go back almost four decades, but some have taken out defamation cases against the 77 year old comedian.   Another of his accusers is Joan Tarshis.   JOAN TARSHIS: We were called liars. Now that the truth has come out that he has bought drugs in order to drug women to have sex with him.   MICHAEL VINCENT: Overnight a judge allowed Associated Press to unseal part of Bill Cosby's deposition in a 2005 sex abuse case which was later settled out of court.   His lawyers tried to stop the release, arguing it would embarrass him but the judge wrote, "Why would he be embarrassed by his own version of the facts?"   The judge continued, "The stark contrast between Bill Cosby the public moralist and Bill Cosby the subject of serious allegations concerning improper and perhaps criminal conduct is a matter as to which the AP and by extension the public has a significant interest."   The comedian's lawyers have today released a statement saying, "The only reason Mr Cosby settled the 2005 case was because it would have been embarrassing in those days to put all those women on the stand and his family had no clue and that would have been very hurtful."   Gloria Allred represents more than a dozen of Mr Cosby's accusers.   GLORIA ALLRED: Well, I do understand that he did admit to using Quaaludes with one woman and obtaining seven prescriptions for Quaaludes with the intention of using it to have sex with other women.   This is a very, very important admission. This is the kind of admission that he has been attempting to hide from the public for many, many years.   MICHAEL VINCENT: She plans to use this latest document in a case currently before California's Supreme Court, which has to decide whether to hear a lawsuit that accuses Mr Cosby of sexual misconduct with a 15 year old girl back in 1974.   His lawyers want the case dismissed.   This is Michael Vincent for AM.
There's been a propaganda war going on over who will produce Apple's next generation processors. Every time that there's a report that TSMC will retain Apple's chip business, a counter report is soon to follow stating the contrary. In late December it was reported that GlobalFoundries was experiencing tooling delays . So today, to counter that report, magically Samsung will gain 70% of Apple's A9 business with GlobalFoundries only being used as Samsung's "backup fab." How convenient is a report like that to skirt the issues surrounding GlobalFoundries. Tailor made wouldn't you say? Nonetheless, the latest rumor gives Apple's business to Samsung until there's another one to contradict it.  The rumor de jour is that Samsung Electronics and GlobalFoundries have secured a combined 70% of orders for Apple's A9 processors with their 14nm FinFET technology, according to industry sources.  Samsung will be ready to produce 30,000-40,000 12-inch wafers monthly to meet demand on its 14nm process node, with the demand from both Apple and Samsung's own handset division, said the sources. Samsung will also be building its next-generation Exynos processor on its own 14nm process.  GlobalFoundries will be used as a backup fab by Samsung for the manufacture of Apple's 14nm A9 chips, with the availability of production capacity estimated at 20,000-30,000 wafers monthly, the sources indicated.  Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company (TSMC), which fabricates all of Apple's A8 chips for the iPhone 6 devices, will take up the remaining 30% of orders for Apple's next-generation A9 chips with its 16nm FinFET process, the sources noted.  This recurring rumor war in the press over who is getting Apple's chip business is one of the most annoying in the industry. But that's life in rumor-land. Apple is pretty strict on what suppliers say in the press, officially or in magic rumors. I guess we'll know who won Apple's chip business once iFixit tears down Apple's next generation iPhones. Until then, expect the rumor war on this to continue.   About Making Comments on our Site: Patently Apple reserves the right to post, dismiss or edit any comments. Comments are reviewed daily from 4am to 7pm PST and sporadically over the weekend.
China's middle class has surpassed that of the United States to become the world's largest, according to the 2015 Credit Suisse Global Wealth Report.  The Swiss Bank also predicted that Asia will be the site of the greatest expansion of the world's middle class.  With 109 million adults "this year, the Chinese middle class for the first time outnumbered" that in the United States at 92 million, the report states.  While the number of middle class worldwide grew last year at a slower pace than the wealthy, it "will continue to expand in emerging economies overall, with a lion's share of that growth to occur in Asia," Credit Suisse chief executive Tidjane Thiam said in a statement accompanying the annual report.  "As a result, we will see changing consumption patterns as well as societal changes as, historically, the middle class has acted as an agent of stability and prosperity," he added.  Key factors in economic development are the size and wealth of the middle class, which is often at the heart of political movements and new consumption trends, the report said.  Credit Suisse categorized the middle class as those having wealth at least double the annual median income for their country.  While Europe and the United States lead the globe when it comes to wealth, Thiam said "the growth of wealth in emerging markets has been most impressive, including a fivefold rise in China since the beginning of the century."  China now accounts for a fifth of the world population, but holds nearly 10% of the world's wealth.
KANSAS CITY, Mo. -- Baseball Commissioner Bud Selig has gone to the Boston Red Sox with complaints over a film Bobby Valentine produced about Dominican prospects.  "Ballplayer: Pelotero," a documentary that tracks corruption in the process of signing Dominican amateurs, opens Friday.  "I expressed our concerns to Red Sox ownership and that was it. What they did from there is up to them," Selig said Tuesday during a question-and-answer session with the Baseball Writers' Association of America. "There were a lot of things that were inaccurate."  MLB says many of the issues have been rectified since 2009, the period covered by the film.  "It doesn't really reflect what's happened in recent years in the Dominican," said Rob Manfred, MLB's executive vice president of economics and league affairs, said in a statement.  Valentine, in his first season as Red Sox manager, said in text message to The Associated Press that he did not think he would respond.  "There are not a lot of headlines that are going to come out of this, but that somebody has a problem with something that Bobby Valentine did, probably a pretty big headline that would come out of it," union head Michael Weiner said. "More seriously, I don't think it's Bobby's involvement. When you expose the kinds of practices ... it's not an easy thing for MLB to see, and I know that it's not a complimentary treatment of some of the facets of the way MLB has handled it down there."  Jon Paley, Ross Finkel and Trevor Martin, the film's co-directors, issued a statement defending their work.  "It is frustrating to hear Commissioner Selig state that our film is inaccurate," they said. "We stand by what we documented in `Ballplayer: Pelotero' and would welcome the opportunity to showcase the documentary to Mr. Selig so he can specifically address what he feels is inaccurate."
Please Come Home  A child's book about divorce  Sanford  1985  Subjects like death and divorce are not exactly my favorite topics for a children's book, but I do get requests for them often enough. Do they magically heal? No, but maybe they are the beginning of dialogue and healing for the kids. That said, I doubt this book helps anyone.  This author hints at violence from Dad. Mom tells child that Dad left because he didn't love her. Frankly, if these two parents are behaving this way, child probably is better off in foster care. I felt awful reading this book. Final blow for this book: this is written by the same author as our most famous post ever: Satan for Kids (part two, click here) and the equally awful book Drugs are Evil. I think these books could be marketed as a set of the most disturbing picture books ever.  Mary
Move over, dogs. Cats are man's new best friend.  In his series Men and Cats, photographer David Williams captures the bond between the two companions, using his male, cat-loving friends as subjects. Williams hopes to help destroy the stereotype of cats being associated with female friendships (i.e. the crazy cat lady).  "I don't subscribe to the way society genderizes animal ownership. I want to show that I'm not the only one who thinks so," Williams told Mashable.  Beyond the study of pets and masculinity, Williams' main goal is to show how every animal deserves a loving home. An advocate of shelter adoption, Williams hopes his series will spread the message that human-animal companionship is universal.  More photos from this series, as well as Williams' other photography work, can be found on his website and on Instagram.  Men & Cats  BONUS: Will Your Cat Sit in a Stupid Circle? #CatCircles
Time magazine columnist Kareem Abdul-Jabbar penned an op-ed Wednesday arguing that a Ben Carson presidency would be devastating for black Americans.  The former NBA star said that while the retired neurosurgeon is "a deeply moral man" whose success story is "the stuff [of] the American dream," a Carson presidency would be bad for blacks because his "repressive, muddled and pious policies and opinions often run against our Constitution."  "His presidency would be marked by even worse gridlock while he wastes his time trying to impose his narrow and sometimes ill-informed morality on the other 319 million people in the nation," Mr. Abdul-Jabbar wrote. "And it would definitely not be good for African-Americans to have a president who flounders helplessly in office because it would perpetuate the stereotype that blacks can't be effective CEOs, quarterbacks and leaders."  He went on to argue that Mr. Carson's religious and moral opinions on homosexuality and climate change run contrary to scientific evidence.  "Carson perpetuates the black stereotype of someone who's too confused or frightened by all that complicated science so he or she ignores it, clinging to superstitions or religion," he continued. "Obviously, white politicians have been making the same buffoonish claims, but they aren't representative of a minority struggling to achieve equality.  "A Carson presidency would also be a direct attack on the health of African-Americans: he equated the Affordable Care Act to a form of slavery," Mr. Abdul-Jabbar wrote. "Actually, poverty is the form of slavery that is most insidious in America, and it is perpetuated by institutional racism, which Ben Carson seems to deny exists. … If Carson refuses to acknowledge institutional racism, then it is unlikely he will do much to alleviate the problem.  "We are always striving to do better for our people by fulfilling the promise of a democratic Eden here and now. How we participate in that revolution determines who we really are. These are the times when all Americans need a champion willing to fight hard to fix the problems that affect people from all walks of life, not deny or ignore them. Ben Carson is not that champion," he concluded.   Copyright © 2018 The Washington Times, LLC. Click here for reprint permission.
The discussion of the offseason for the Baltimore Orioles has focused around Chris Davis. After laying claim to another impressive season with 47 home runs in 2015, leading MLB, Davis is aimed to make upwards of 6 years/$144 million based on reports from MLB Trade Rumors. With an estimated annual salary being near $24 million, can the Orioles afford the first baseman? The Orioles aren't the first team to struggle with such a decision for a power hitting first baseman entering free agency.  In the book Big Data Baseball, Travis Sawchick describes how current Pittsburgh Pirates General Manager Neal Huntington used historical information regarding payroll allocation to make a controversial move. Writes Sawchick:  Using the software [DiamondView], the Indians made key decisions, such as when they elected not to sign aging star Jim Thome to an extension after the 2002 season, in part because of the database, the Cleveland Plain Dealer reported. […] Huntington noted that the Indians found in a payroll analysis that no major league club, dating back to 1985, had won a World Series when committing 15 percent or more of its payroll to one player.  Jim Thome went on to sign with the Philadelphia Phillies for 6 years and $85 million. He was later traded to the White Sox after waiving a no-trade clause in his contract. Thome managed to maintain a consistent offensive production through the deal until the age of 37. He managed to put together a 138 wRC+ and hit 207 HRs during the deal. He managed an 18.2 WAR, 49th best in MLB during this time. Looking at the value as per WAR, Thome was worth around $87.9 million for the six year deal. It all seemed to work out well for the numbers, but Thome was never able to get that World Series championship for his teams.  Returning to 2002, the Cleveland Indians certainly didn't improve from 2002 to 2003. The team went from a 74-88 team with Thome as their top player (7.4 bWAR) to 68-94 with Milton Bradley (4.1 bWAR) as their top player. Attendance crashed as well going from 2.6 million to 1.7 million. The team would eventually improve several years down the road eventually making the ALCS and losing in seven during 2007 season. However, the lost of a cultural hero for the Indians in Thome was felt by the club for years to come.  It's conundrum that teams have to make with superstars like Chris Davis. How much money do you invest in a single player? The trend has certainly continued over the past decade with the following World Series winners and contenders in 2015:  It appears as if the Thome Conundrum has slightly modified over the past decade, but overall teams have held to the standard fairly well with the average being 15.4% +/- 3.2 of payroll. With that knowledge, let's make the assumption that the Orioles can spend up to 18.6% of their payroll (…or one standard deviation removed from the Thome Conundrum). With an expected salary of $24 million, the Orioles would need to raise payroll from the their 2015 payroll of $120 million to $130 million in order to accomplish this task. This is not an outlandish expectation for the team. However if we return to the original Thome Conundrum of 15%, the payroll would need to be raised to $160 million in order to win the World Series. Even with MASN money, payroll for a small market team like the Baltimore Orioles cannot raise by over 30%.  The Baltimore Orioles are in a tough position to decide on Chris Davis. The contractual allocation of that percentage of payroll likely limits their ability now and in the future with other mega-contracts pending (i.e. Manny Machado). Davis, like Thome, will likely be an excellent offensive player with value to match during his contract. But is that offensive production enough to balance out and fill the holes for the rest of the team. The teams that have violated the Thome conundrum have also benefited from excellent rookie classes. The 2002 The Marlins had a 23-and-under nucleus of Josh Beckett, Dontrelle Willis, and Miguel Cabrera. The 2010/2012 Giants 23-and-unders included Madison Bumgarner, Pablo Sandoval, and Buster Posey.  In addition, the teams that have violated the previous rule of 15% haven't done so with two players. With Manny Machado likely to receive a mega-contract in the near future, the prospect of having two players making $25 million+ and taking up over 15% of the payroll is likely. The Orioles need to be aware of this roster restriction that will be coming in the back-end years of a Davis contract.  However, the team also has to be aware of the public relations and attendance impact that not signing Davis could bring as evident by the Indians drop in 2002 to 2003. The team has seen a resurgence in attendance going from 1.75 million
They may be creepy and crawly, but spiders produce some of the world's strongest material: silk. Weight for weight, spider silk is five times as strong as piano wire. Now, scientists at Arizona Statue University have announced that they have found a way to obtain a wide variety of elastic properties of the silk of several intact spiders' webs using a sophisticated laser light scattering technique.  Scientists used an extremely lower power laser (less than 3.5 milliwats) and aimed it through spider webs. With this technique, they were able to spatially map the elastic stiffness of each web without disturbing it. They found variations among discreet fibers, junctions, and glue spots.  Overall, they studied four different types of spider's webs. They included Nephila clavipes, A. aurantia (gilded silver face), L. Hesperus (western black widow) and P. viridans (green lynx spider). All of these spiders' webs possessed major silk elastic properties.  But the researchers didn't only study the structure of silk, they also studied supercontraction, a property unique to silk. Spider silk soaks up water when exposed to high humidity, and this absorbed water can lead to shrinkage in an unrestrained fiber-up to 50 percent shrinkage in N. clavipes silk. Yet the spider silk is versatile, and this supercontraction helps the spider tailor the actual properties of the silk it produces during spinning.  Their information could help provide a blueprint for the structural engineering of a large array of materials. It could create everything from clothing to rope, and could allow materials to be stronger, stretchier, and more elastic.  The study was published in the online issue of Nature materials.
Visiting Marakech with actresses Meryl Streep and Frieda Pinto of the "Slumdog Millionaire" film, she told girls in attendance she wanted them to be part of a global conversation on female education.  "We want to share this conversation with young girls around the world, particularly in the United States," she said.  Obama, who was accompanied by her daughters Malia and Sasha, arrived on Monday evening in Marakech and was welcomed by King Mohamed VI.  The first lady launched her "Let Girls Learn" education initiative in March 2015 to help adolescent girls across the world access a quality education.  She has since travelled the globe to call for greater support for the millions of girls kept away from school or forced to abandon their studies.  "She shared lots of things with us that will help us to work hard and focus on our education," Rihab Boutadghart, a beneficiary of the initiative, said after attending the launch in Marakech.  Morocco has one of the lowest female labour force participation rates in the world, according to the Millennium Challenge Corporation, a US government aid agency.  The MCC used Obama's visit to announce a nearly $100-million (90 million euros) fund to tackle high drop-out rates among girls and make schools more "girl-friendly".  The money, which will fund internships, girl-friendly bathrooms and training for teachers, is expected to benefit about 100,000 students, said the MCC.  The Peace Corps said it would work with its volunteers and community leaders to advance girls' education and improve their employment prospects.  USAID pledged to spend $400,000 through an NGO to establish five new dorms for girls across the country.  Obama said she hoped the funds would "help these girls succeed in the workforce and fulfill their boundless promise".  Over half of Moroccan girls aged over 15 are illiterate, despite efforts by the government and NGOs to promote their education, according to a 2014 study by the High Commission for Planning, a government body.  But the same study said the rate of school attendance among girls of 7-12 years old had risen from 78 percent in 2004 to 94 percent in 2014.  Obama says girls around the world face challenges that prevent more than 62 million from getting an education.  The first lady spent Monday in Liberia, where she told girls to fight to stay in school despite financial pressures that cause the vast majority to drop out.  She will continue her trip with a visit to Spain on Thursday, where she will deliver a speech on the education initiative before meeting Queen Letizia.
Julie A. Clark   Pin Pinterest ⋆ Rec Recommend this Post 2  FanPosts are user-submitted, and are not always representative of GBH editorial/staff or any of our opinions. Please don't post spam or self-promotion, because that's not very good bull. Thanks!
In this section, they want us to create this table:  apples Alice dogs oranges Bob cats cherries Carol moose banana David goose  It must be justified to the right, and the input is tableData. Here's my code:  tableData=[['apples', 'oranges', 'cherries', 'banana'], ['Alice', 'Bob', 'Carol', 'David'], ['dogs', 'cats', 'moose', 'goose']] listlens=[] tour=0 lists={} for m in tableData: total=0 tour+=1 for n in m: total+=len(n) lists["list:",tour]=total print("list",tour,total) itemcount=list(lists.values()) sortedlen=(sorted(itemcount,reverse=True)) longest=sortedlen[0] #print (lists['list:', 1]) #print (longest) for m in range(len(tableData[0])): for n in range(len(tableData)): print (tableData[n][m],end=" ") n+=1 print ("".rjust(lists['list:', 1],"-")) m+=1  I'm almost done except for one thing, I can't make it right-justified. This output is the closest I came so far.  apples Alice dogs --------------------------- oranges Bob cats --------------------------- cherries Carol moose --------------------------- banana David goose ---------------------------  If I put rjust inside the inner for-loop the output is much different:
Causes and Effects of Emigration from Germany (1870s-1880s)  Between Bismarck's appointment as minister president of Prussia in 1862 and his departure from office in 1890, almost 3 million Germans left their country in search of a better life abroad. Many of them went to the United States. These emigrants included land-hungry peasants and workers from rural backgrounds, as well as artisans and shopkeepers hoping to make a new start. Between 1874 and 1879 emigration decreased somewhat, but after 1880 economic fluctuations fuelled the next and largest wave of emigration, which only began to subside in the mid-1890s. This report by a British Royal Commission analyzes the causes and effects of German emigration. It highlights low wages, a lack of employment opportunities, and the decline of older industries as economic reasons for emigration, but political considerations – e.g., the attitude of the German government towards the Social Democratic movement – also played an important role. The attractiveness of the U.S. was enhanced when Germans contemplating emigration received upbeat letters or money transfers (remittances) from friends and relatives who were already there. Enticing advertisements by steamship companies only added to the allure. Like later advocates of German colonization, however, the authors of this report recognize that emigration also drained Germany of productive forces and potential military recruits. print version return to document list previous document next document page 1 of 2  Some indications have already been given of the causes which are at work in this vast migratory movement of the German population. The difficulty of distinguishing between the various factors, social, political, and economic, which combine to produce such a result, can scarcely be overestimated; but the immense preponderance of natives of the agricultural districts amongst the emigrants point to the defective conditions of agriculture as the main source of the discontent with home surroundings, which must always precede any migration of population. Putting for a moment this important factor on one side, due weight must be allowed to the social and political causes which combine to produce the result. Amongst these may be enumerated the attitude of the German government prior to 1890 towards the great body of German Socialists, and the discontent felt, at any rate in time of peace, with the German military system. The desire for a fuller life, and for the advantages offered by the towns, have drawn a vast number of the best and most intelligent of the laboring classes from the east of Germany to the west. "It is not so much the desire to obtain more money," says the last report of the East Prussian Association (Ostpreusslicher [sic] Centralverein), "which impels, at any rate, the unmarried people to emigrate. [ . . . ] It is much more the wish for an independent life, and for pleasures and amusements which here, in the east, we cannot offer to the country folk." But, as Dr. Max Sering says, the cause lies even deeper, and must be sought in "the ideals of freedom and human dignity," which have produced "a striving after a higher social status," even independently of material advantage or of intellectual gain. The growth of education, and the enlightenment which the term of military service brings to the agricultural laborer, have helped to foster these social aspirations, and it is rare to find the children, even in Mecklenburg, where the conditions of labor are specially favorable, content to follow the calling of their fathers. This attraction attaching to the conditions of town life is exercised even more strongly by those of the United States, and it is fostered by the ceaseless efforts of rival steamship companies and their agents to present those attractions in glowing terms, and to minimize the cost and difficulties of transport. Further, the letters and remittances of friends and relations, who have already emigrated, produce a very great effect upon those remaining at home; and perhaps this has contributed as much as anything else to the increased migration. Nevertheless, as has been well pointed out by Herr Lindig, neither the efforts of unscrupulous agents, nor the representations of friends and relations, would have sufficed to induce such an immense number of persons to forsake their homes, if the economic condition of the German laborer had been satisfactory. Low wages, lack of employment, the decay of the lesser industries, and the too rapid influx of would-be factory-workers into the towns, combine to produce a state of things compared with which the United States appear to have everything to offer. As Professor von Philippovich has said, the tide of emigration can only be stemmed in states which seek "to make home home-like to the wanderers by raising their economic and social conditions." On the other hand, the economic and political conditions of the countries to which the emigrants go may in the future be expected to exercise a still greater influence; and it is not improbable that the attitude now adopted by the United States toward immigration, combined with
Sun, 18/05/2008 - 10:33 — webmaster  Learn about the orthography, morphology, syllabification and synonyms/antonyms of a Modern Greek word. The finest words in the world are only vain sounds, if we cannot comprehend them.  Modern Greek is a great deluge of words deriving from Ancient Greek. Through the ages some of the words started to overlap others in meaning. In addition, many of them have multiple meanings and many can be used as various parts of speech.  Lexiscope aims to clear up such issues by presenting information that clarifies the uses of any Modern Greek word or phrase. Information includes syllabification, morphology, synonyms, antonyms and any known expressions that the word may feature in.  Insert any Greek word below, and press Search.  Lexiscope is a compound language tool that provides information about a Modern Greek word or phrase, combining the functionality of Neurolingo's Hyphenator, Speller, Lemmatizer, Morphological Lexicon and Thesaurus.  For our guests, Lexiscope has a daily usage limit of 10 words. Sign up for free to take advantage of 30 words per day.  Alternately, you can purchase our mobile version Lexiscope Mobile App for unlimited usage.
After being picked up from your central Melbourne hotel in the mid-afternoon, set out on the 1.5-hour journey to Phillip Island. Traveling aboard an air-conditioned bus, head south toward the coast and admire the scenery along the Yarra River. Arrive at the fishing village of San Remo, where you cross the bridge to Phillip Island.  The first stop of the evening is the Phillip Island Visitor Information Centre, where you learn more about the island's native wildlife, hear about ongoing conservation efforts, and discover fascinating facts about the little penguins on Phillip Island—home to the largest penguin colony in Australia.  Arrive at Summerland Beach, on the southwestern coast of Phillip Island, in time to watch the nightly Penguin Parade. Depending on the tour option chosen, either find a place on the beach or watch from the comfort of the Penguins Plus viewing platform. No matter your vantage point, enjoy watching hundreds of little penguins waddling out of the sea and up the beach to their burrows.  At the end of the evening, return to Melbourne and enjoy views of the illuminated city on the drive back to your hotel.
This is a comprehensive list of every GTA 5 cheat code and an explanation of what that cheat code does. We've got the GTA 5 cheat codes for PC, Xbox One, Xbox 360, PS4 and PS3. To enable the GTA V cheat codes on the consoles simply by executing the code below while in gameplay, to enable the GTA V PC cheat codes you need to go in to the menu by pressing esc and find cheats in the menu or by pressing ` and typing the cheat code in to the console.  GTA 5 Cheat Codes  PS4 / PS3 GTA 5 Cheat Codes Effect Code Invincibility RIGHT, X, RIGHT, LEFT, RIGHT, R1, RIGHT, LEFT, X, TRIANGLE Max Health and Armor CIRCLE, L1, TRIANGLE, R2, X, SQUARE, CIRCLE, RIGHT, SQUARE, L1, L1, L1 Give Weapons (Ammo, Weapons) TRIANGLE, R2, LEFT, L1, X, RIGHT, TRIANGLE, DOWN, SQUARE, L1, L1, L1 Super Jump LEFT, LEFT, TRIANGLE, TRIANGLE, RIGHT, RIGHT, LEFT, RIGHT, SQUARE, R1, R2 Moon Gravity LEFT, LEFT, L1, R1, L1, RIGHT, LEFT, L1, LEFT Raise Wanted Level R1, R1, CIRCLE, R2, LEFT, RIGHT, LEFT, RIGHT, LEFT, RIGHT Lower Wanted Level R1, R1, CIRCLE, R2, RIGHT, LEFT, RIGHT, LEFT, RIGHT, LEFT Fast Run TRIANGLE, LEFT, RIGHT, RIGHT, L2, L1, SQUARE Fast Swim LEFT, LEFT, L1, RIGHT, RIGHT, R2, LEFT, L2, RIGHT Recharge Ability X, X, SQUARE, R1, L1, X, RIGHT, LEFT, X Give Parachute LEFT, RIGHT, L1, L2, R1, R2, R2, LEFT, LEFT, RIGHT, L1 Skyfall L1, L2, R1, R2, LEFT, RIGHT, LEFT, RIGHT, L1, L2, R1, R2, LEFT, RIGHT, LEFT, RIGHT Explosive Melee Attacks RIGHT, LEFT, X, TRIANGLE, R1, CIRCLE, CIRCLE, CIRCLE, L2 Bang Bang (Explosive Bullets) RIGHT, SQUARE, X, LEFT, R1, R2, LEFT, RIGHT, RIGHT, L1, L1, L1 Flaming Bullets L1, R1, SQUARE, R1, LEFT, R2, R1, LEFT, SQUARE, RIGHT, L1, L1 Slow Motion Aim SQUARE, L2, R1, TRIANGLE, LEFT, SQUARE, L2, RIGHT, X Drunk Mode TRIANGLE, RIGHT, RIGHT, LEFT, RIGHT, SQUARE, CIRCLE, LEFT Change Weather R2, X, L1, L1, L2, L2, L2, SQUARE Slidey Cars TRIANGLE, R1, R1, LEFT, R1, L1, R2, L1 Slow Motion TRIANGLE, LEFT, RIGHT, RIGHT, SQUARE, R2, R1 Spawn Buzzard Attack Helicopter CIRCLE, CIRCLE, L1, CIRCLE, CIRCLE, CIRCLE, L1, L2, R1, TRIANGLE, CIRCLE, TRIANGLE Spawn Comet R1, CIRCLE, R2, RIGHT, L1, L2, X, X, SQUARE, R1 Spawn Sanchez CIRCLE, X, L1, CIRCLE, CIRCLE, L1, CIRCLE, R1, R2, L2, L1, L1 Spawn Trashmaster CIRCLE, R1, CIRCLE, R1, LEFT, LEFT, R1, L1, CIRCLE, RIGHT Spawn Limo R2, RIGHT, L2, LEFT, LEFT, R1, L1, CIRCLE, RIGHT Spawn Stunt Plane CIRCLE, RIGHT, L1, L2, LEFT, R1, L1, L1, LEFT, LEFT, X, TRIANGLE Spawn Caddy CIRCLE, L1, LEFT, R1, L2, X, R1, L1, CIRCLE, X Spawn Rapid GT R2, L1, CIRCLE, RIGHT, L1, R1, RIGHT, LEFT, CIRCLE, R2 Spawn Duster RIGHT,
Installation is simple.  For the charging station, use your own trusted local electrician, or if you're an experienced electrician you can install Plugless yourself. Just like any Level 2 corded charging system, installation pricing depends on the current electrical configuration where you install. More details can be found in the online electrical guide.  The vehicle upgrade is free and is typically installed at your local dealership or certified mechanic. Installation takes ~2 hours, and our Customer Care team coordinates the installation to take care of you from start to finish. More information can be found on our Install page, or for help please contact a Plugless Advisor using this form.
Mixing Things Up: A Beginner's Guide to Mix and Mega  By ChrystalFalchion . Art by Tikitik  What is Mix and Mega?  In a nutshell, Mix and Mega is a metagame where any fully evolved OU-legal Pokémon can hold any Mega Stone. Upon Mega Evolving, they get the stat, changes, new typing (if applicable), and ability that the stone would give the original holder. For example, the Altarianite gives Altaria base stats of 75/110/110/110/105/85, grants it a secondary Fairy typing, and changes its ability to Pixilate. This translates to a +40 boost to Attack, a +20 boost to Defense, and a +40 boost to Special Attack. So, if you gave Landorus-T the Altarianite, its base stats would become 89/185/110/145/80/91, it would become a Ground / Fairy-type, and it would gain Pixilate. Click here for an easy-to-view list of what Mega Stone does what. You activate the Mega Stone the same way you would ordinarily, by clicking the Mega Evolve button, and you can Mega Evolve as many Pokémon on your team as you wish. The boosts remain until the Pokémon faints. The Red Orb and Blue Orb activate immediately, as they would on Groudon and Kyogre. If a Mega Stone would take any of a Pokémon's Base Stats above 255 or below 0, the Pokémon can't use it. So Shuckle can't use the Sablenite, as it would take its Speed below 0 and its Defense and Special Defense above 255.  There are a few bans, though. The Kangaskhanite is banned on anything other than Kangaskhan. The Beedrillite, Mawilite, and Medichamite can only be used by Beedrill and by Pokémon that already have Huge Power or Pure Power, respectively. Likewise, the Blazikenite can only be held by Pokémon that already have Speed Boost. Since Shadow Tag is banned, nothing can hold the Gengarite. As well as all Ubers Pokémon being barred from holding Mega Stones, Smeargle, Slaking, Regigigas, Kyurem-B, Dragonite, and Cresselia can't use them either. Lucario can only use the Lucarionite.  What's Mix and Mega like to play?  For starters, and this probably won't surprise you, you will very rarely find anything not using a Mega Stone or Primal Orb. Therefore, don't use Knock Off, Trick, or Switcheroo—they're useless here. Offensive teams are the most common here: with such massive offensive stats being common, there's only so much you can reliably wall. That's not to say walls aren't viable: Slowbronite Blissey and Blue Orb Ferrothorn are both great Pokémon. But stacking multiple walls together is not a great strategy in Mix and Mega, as there are several Mega Stones that grant Magic Bounce, which renders a lot of weak walls setup fodder.  When you give a Pokémon a Mega Stone, the main aim is to reduce its flaws, buff its strengths, or give it an entirely new role.  Threatlist  Every tier has Pokémon you must prepare for, and Mix and Mega is no exception. These are those Pokémon.  Terrakion  Mega Stones: Lucarionite, Lopunnite  As I said a bit earlier, some Pokémon hold Mega Stones to buff their strengths, and Terrakion is one of the best examples of that in Mix and Mega. With the Lucarionite, it can boost its already excellent Speed and Attack while gaining Adaptability on those wonderful STABs. This turns an already dangerous Pokémon into an absolute monster that can 2HKO almost anything in its path. If you don't like bulky Ghost-types or you've used the Lucarionite elsewhere, the Lopunnite is a fine option as well, as it gives a greater Speed boost than the Lucarionite and Scrappy lets Terrakion spam Close Combat more freely. However, while Terrakion's typing is brilliant offensively, it gives it a slew of unfortunate weaknesses, and Stone Edge has a nasty habit of missing at the worst times.  Manaphy  Mega Stones: Absolite, Sceptilite  Manaphy's main issue in standard play is its only OK Speed. The Absolite soon patches that up, taking it up to a brilliant 140 while also buffing its Special Attack to an excellent 140. Add Tail Glow on top of that, and you've got one dangerous special sweeper. And let's not forget, mono-Water is a good defensive typing, and Manaphy still has solid 100 / 100 / 100 defenses. The Sceptilite's also
Originally Posted by DRNewcomb Originally Posted by I've been trying to sort out this statement and have to ask: You do know that outside of MS, S. Ala, NW Fla and maybe a bit around Memphis, that CSpire is roaming Verizon and Sprint?  14 sections of 700Mhz Block "A" Covering Mississippi, Alabama, Tennessee with small about of Kentucky and Georgia.10 small sections of 700Mhz Block "B" Covering lower parts of Mississippi & lower Alabama. With small lower part of Tennesse and time part of Florida (Panama City & I-10)5 small sections of 700Mhz Block "C" Covering Florance, Gadsden & Annistion Alabama. Also, two small parts of Fort Watlton Beach & Apalachicola Florida.7 sections of 835-849 & 880-894 Block "B" in Mississippi shared with AT&T.3 small sections of AWS-1 Block "A" in Florida Panhandle that stops just before Tallahassee.1 big section of AWS-1 Block C that covers 60% Central Mississippi and good chunk of western central Alabama.Shared agrement with 5 Carriers of AWS-1 Block "D" coving Kansas, Missouri, Kentucky, Tennessee, Miss, Bama Louisiana and panhandel of Florida.Shared agreemnet with 4 Carriers of AWS-1 Block "F" coving Kansas, Missouri, Kentucky, Tennessee, Miss, Bama Louisiana and panhandel of Florida.Shared agreemnet with 6 Carriers of PCS Block "A" coving Louisiana, lower Miss and panhandel of Florida.7 sections of PCS Block "D" coving Louisiana, lower Miss and panhandel of Florida. Plus share with AT&T Central Miss and Bama.Shared agreemnet with AT&T and Verizon of PCS Block "B" covering Eastern Louisiana, lower Miss and panhandel of Florida.4 sections of PCS Block "E" covering most of the right side of Mississippi4 sections of PCS Block "F" covering most of the most of Mississippi, West Tenn, East Ark. Shared agreement with AT&T, Verizon and Sprint coving North Miss, West Tennessee & E. Arkansas.Many sections of PCS BLock "C" owned and shared coving Louisiana, Miss, East Ark and West Tenn.
BRUSSELS The European Union, faced with a growing refugee crisis in Greece, launched a new aid programme on Wednesday worth an initial 700 million euros that mirrors the kind of disaster relief it offers developing nations.  European states have tightened border controls following the arrival of more than a million migrants by sea last year and the Athens government has appealed for help to house and care for tens of thousands still arriving and now stranded in Greece.  "We are ... really worried," European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker said of the build-up of migrants on the now-closed Macedonian border, adding that the new plan had been prompted by fears of "a huge humanitarian crisis in Greece".  The Commission's proposal, if approved, will channel 300 million euros ($325 million) this year from its 155 billion euro annual budget to the new emergency assistance scheme and 200 million euros both next year and in 2018.  Officials stress that the programme will not divert funds from the EU's 1.1 billion euro annual budget allocated to helping the world's poorest. Relieving the suffering of refugees closer to their homes is a key part of an EU strategy to deter people from making dangerous journeys to Europe, they say.  More than 400 people have died or gone missing in the Mediterranean this year as they tried to reach Europe, most of them on the short but perilous crossing from Turkey to Greece.  Turkey is at the heart of the EU's efforts to slow the influx of refugees and migrants and the bloc wants Ankara to ensure that daily arrivals fall below 1,000 from 2,000-3,000 at present. [nL8N16A34W]  Two officials told Reuters that Germany, the principal destination for those arriving in Europe, is looking for flows to be "in the realm of three digits, not four" per day. Should that happen, Berlin would start taking refugees directly from Turkey for resettlement - an attempt to promote legal migration rather than continuing the chaotic influx of 2015.  The new EU money, to be spent in conjunction with the United Nations and charities working in Greece and other EU states, will help to fund shelter, medical aid and other basic services.  Greece, which now houses about 25,000 migrants, has hitherto received EU funding under other programmes to bolster its border and security systems, though Athens has complained that the offers have been inadequate.  "The number of refugees continues to rise, so do their humanitarian needs," Humanitarian Aid Commissioner Christos Stylianides said.  At a single border point, the Idomeni crossing between Greece and Macedonia, between 12,000 and 15,000 stranded people are in need of urgent humanitarian assistance, he said.  "OVERWHELMED"  EU officials said the aim was to have the new programme operational on the ground "within weeks rather than months".  It will become a permanent feature of the EU budget and is intended for use by any EU state that is "overwhelmed" and cannot cope with a wide range of emergencies, including accidents, militant attacks and epidemics. It will need approval by the European Parliament and member states.  Greece, the migrants' main gateway to Europe, would initially be the main beneficiary of the emergency scheme for "tackling wide-ranging humanitarian crises within the EU".  The money would also be available to other EU countries along the Balkan migration route used by migrants. Macedonia and Serbia, which are on that route, are not in the EU.  Greece, its economy blighted by the euro zone debt crisis, has asked for 480 million euros to help it cope with some 100,000 migrants. EU officials said on Wednesday they were still looking at that request.  More than a million people reached Europe last year and some 133,000 arrived on the continent so far in 2016 in what has grown to be a major crisis for the bloc, that now also risks turning into a humanitarian disaster. [nL8N1694GU]  ($1 = 0.9212 euros)  (Additional reporting by Alastair Macdonald and Robin Emmott; Editing by Gareth Jones)  This story has not been edited by Firstpost staff and is generated by auto-feed.
209 |  package size: 4pc (2x CW, 2x CCW)  With 2cm wires and Micro-JST-1.25 plugs, these motors plug straight into a Dromida Ominus (and his clone brothers, the Galaxy Visitor 6 and the Revell Rayvore), and with the optional plug adapter, you can use them on a Blade 180QX without soldering or crimping. Please order the connectors separately.  Dromida Ominus, Galaxy Visitor 6, Revell Rayvore - installation instructions:  - Take the pinions off the motors and turn them around ("neck" of pinions away from motor). Possible by hand, or with carefully levering with a small screwdriver.  - Screw feet off, swap motors. Color coding the same as stock. (Dromida labels their motors after the prop rotation, not the motor rotation!)  - Align the motor wires centrally when putting the motor holders back in place, or the wires will break!  Blade 180QX - installation instructions:  - plug one of these adapters onto each motor plug  - install the blue/red 0820-15 motors in place of the black/white stock motors  - align black and blue wires with green paint dots on the connectors  performance data:  speed: 15.000Kv  operating voltage: 1.5-3.7V  factory lifetime rating: 5-6 hours  dimensions:  can diameter: 8.5mm  can length: 20mm  shaft diameter: 1mm  shaft length: 5mm  weight: 4.9g  housing: silver  pinion: 11T, polymer  All motor packs contain equal amounts of clockwise and counter clockwise motors. To maximise performance and life span, dont run them in reverse!  Motor rotation and correct polarity is indicated by the wire color:  clockwise: red +, blue -  counter clockwise: white +, black -
This is a parkour map called "The Wall".Your goal is to climb a giant wall!- Play in 1.8.- Keep the difficulty at normal (it should be locked though).- Don't cheat, but you're free to use /kill whenever you want to.- Play in Adventure mode!- Use Save Points!- Look for hidden chests, which can contain food, diamonds, or emeralds (emeralds are used in the village shop).- A few chests are in places you can't get back from (without jumping down or killing yourself), so choose wisely if you really need that chest or not.- Use /kill if you get stuck somewhere or fall down without dying (you will only respawn at save points after dying).- Turn down the render distance if it lags.Please use the included music/sound pack! All music is made by me. The one sound effect is not.Also some people have been asking if it's OK to make videos of this map, and it definitely is, so go ahead :).Also, multiplayer should work fine on this map. There's a ton of food and a lot of chests(way more than you need actually...), and the save points are individual (using /spawnpoint).
By Aryeh Savir  Efrat, Gush Etzion – The IDF and Israeli security forces continued their operation over night to locate the three abducted boys while decimating the Hama terror infrastructure in Judea and Samaria.  The IDF carried out night raids throughout all of Judea and Samaria, this time meeting little resistance.  An IDF spokesman announced that as part of an extensive series of intelligence and operational activities, security forces arrested 65 wanted persons; 51 of them were released as part of the Schalit deal in 2011. They further shut down a terrorist affiliated radio station. Ten brigades are participating in these operations. Since the beginning of the operation some 240 terrorists were arrested and about 800 homes were searched. Hundreds of weapons have been uncovered during these searches.  The Gazan front appears to be heating up. Hamas officials from Gaza have threatened to retaliate against the IDF's operations against their infrastructure. In the past 14 days, 11 rockets were fired from Gaza at Israel. There are reports of the IDF deploying more Iron Dome anti-rocket systems throughout the south.  The spokesman stated that extensive army operations will continue and deepen as required. "The IDF will relentlessly continue its operational activities and intelligence work. The IDF will bring significant damage to terrorist organizations and act decisively against anyone who activates terror against the State of Israel," said the spokesman.  Brigadier General Nitzan Alon, GOC Central Command, stated that Hamas would emerge from this operation strategically weakened. However, he stressed that the operation was not short term. "We are in the midst of a complex operation to capture terrorists and to return the boys home safely. We are fighting a complex and ongoing campaign that will not end soon. Hamas has been compromised in all its dimensions. Hamas leaders have already admitted their injury. Hamas will emerge from this ongoing battle weakened operationally and strategically. We will continue this assault to the extent necessary, and do everything to bring the boys back home safely," stated Alon.  Tazpit News Agency  {Matzav.com Israel News Bureau}
Pin 5K Shares  Carey Wedler  March 6, 2015  (ANTIMEDIA) Whitter, CA — Six police officers from Whittier, California are suing the city after being punished for protesting ticket quotas. The officers say they complained repeatedly within the department and shortly after were met with discrimination. They say their "careers have been materially and adversely affected, and irreparably harmed" by the city.  Jim Azpilicueta, Anthony Gonzalez, Mike Rosario, Nancy Ogle, Steve Johnson and Cpl. Joseph Rivera say that the quotas were imposed in 2008. They spoke out multiple times but when they took it to their supervisors and the Internal Affairs Division, they were swiftly punished. The officers allege they were reprimanded by being ordered to undergo counseling and that they encountered increased scrutiny, "disparaging" remarks, and faced unwarranted transfers.  Azpilicueta and Johnson faced a "supervisory review and performance improvement plan" while Johnson was eventually the subject of an Internal Affairs review. He was later suspended.  Whittier City Manager James Collier refused to comment, but offered a bland comment without denying the allegations:  "The lawsuit is unfortunate and the city will determine the best course of action once an analysis of the lawsuit is completed."  Whittier Police spokesman John Scoggins declined to comment.  Instances of officers facing punishment for refusing to implement quotas are nothing new. New York City police officers faced slashed vacation time and lunch breaks for refusing to issue tickets during their boycott of the mayor in December and January. NYPD officers are currently suing the city in response to punishment for protesting quotas in minority neighborhoods. In 2013, the city of Los Angeles paid $6 million to officers who were punished for refusing ticket quotas, which the city prefers to call "production goals." The Waldo, Florida police department was shut down by the city last fall after officers came forward about speed traps and forced quotas, among other violations.  Quotas are illegal under California Vehicle Codes 41600 and around the country. They are further evidence that police in their current state do not protect or serve but rather, serve as oppressors and revenue generators. It is a telling sign that officers who attempt to uphold the law and do so through "legal" channels are reprimanded while violent, murderous cops are protected.  The six Whittier police officers are suing for unspecified damages, claiming that in addition to their careers, their health and well-being suffered. It is unclear whether or not the department itself will face repercussions for its violations of the law.  They say they  "Spoke out not only for the rights of themselves and their fellow officers, but also for the rights of the public by speaking out against what they believed to be an unlawful citation and arrest quota."  This article is free and open source. You have permission to republish this article under a Creative Commons license with attribution to the author and TheAntiMedia.org. Tune-in to The Anti-Media radio show Monday-Friday @ 11pm EST, 8pm PST.  Pin 5K Shares
Culture And Media  Morocco: New law limits polygamy, says expert   Rabat, 27 May (AKI) - Polygamist marriages are almost non-existent in Morocco due to new legal restrictions, said a leading commentator on Tuesday.   "Polygamy still exists in Morocco even though it is almost impossible to find polygamous men because of strict legal limitations," said Rita el-Khayat, writer and anthropologist in an interview with Adnkronos International (AKI).   Although polygamy is allowed under Islam, it is not encouraged.   The only instance where polygamist marriages can be legal, is if the woman signs a document giving her consent, said el-Khayat, referring to the situation in Morocco.   "Nowadays, the man has more to lose if he divorces, because he is forced to divide his assets with both wives.   "This means Moroccan men are afraid of engaging in a polygamist marriage, because they almost feel imprisoned, or trapped by this new system."   Al-Khayat, who is in Italy promoting her new book, Between Witness and Reality, said many women emigrated to Europe because they were poor and under Islamic patriarchy.   Earlier this year, the president of Italy's Immigrant Party, Mustapha Mansouri, urged women who were victims of polygamy to call a special helpline for victims of violence, saying that "There are at least 15,000 cases of polygamy in Italy."   Mansouri and his colleagues have for years reported cases of men who converted to Islam with the sole aim of being able to have several wives.   Polygamous marriages are totally illegal in Italy, but imams presiding over such 'ceremonies' leave no paper trail to avoid prosecution, Mansouri noted.   Al-Khayat, 63, thinks that more attention should be paid to the younger, second generation immigrants and that they should focus on the scientific field.   In 1999, al-Khayat became the first woman to write a letter to King Mohammed VI, four months after he had been inaugurated, about the concerns of a reactionary Islamist movement that wanted women to remain at home.   The letter contained several requests regarding the modification of the 'Moudawana' or "Personal Statutes", a sort of family code that many Muslim countries continue to keep as a legal minority.
THE HEAD OF financial regulation at the Central Bank Matthew Elderfield is stepping down from his position, the Central Bank has said.  In a statement, Elderfield says he is planning to return to his home in London to pursue other interests. He has been the deputy governor of the Central Bank with responsibility for financial regulation since January 2010.  Elderfield has told the Central Bank that he is waiving the €100,000 bonus he is entitled to at the end of his contract of employment.  "It has been a great privilege to be a public servant in Ireland in such challenging times," said Elderfield. "But after some six years away, it is time to return home to London."  Elderfield was the CEO of the Bermuda Monetary Authority before he moved to Ireland.  Central Bank Governor Patrick Honohan praised Elderfield for his work in the role, which came under the auspices of the Central Bank after the banking collapse.  "Although it was always evident to me that we were very likely to have Matthew with us for only a few years, it is sad that this period is now drawing to a close," said Honohan.  He said that the "institutional structures [Elderfield] has built and the work practices he has inculcated will endure as his lasting legacy."  Elderfield will officially step down in six months' time. The Central Bank said he will step away "with immediate effect from involvement in supervisory and other issues if and where a conflict could be perceived."
Deworm the World Initiative  More than 835 million preschool- and school-age children are at risk of parasitic worm infection. The Deworm the World Initiative works with governments around the world to develop and implement national, school-based deworming programs.  This results in treatment coverage of over 200 million children a year, and costs on average less than USD $0.50 cents per child per year, with measurable improvements in health, economic and educational outcomes.
Back in the 25th century, Earth launched a generation ship into deep space, with the goal of establishing the first interstellar colony. It dropped out of contact and disappeared, never reaching its destination.  Thousands of years later, it has finally been found.  " Analogue is a sit-up-and-take-notice achievement in storytelling, in interface, in research, in mechanics and in moral ambiguity. "  —Alec Meer, Rock Paper Shotgun Analogue is a sit-up-and-take-notice achievement in storytelling, in interface, in research, in mechanics and in moral ambiguity.  " It was like watching a horror movie, knowing what was about to happen and curious only how awful the director's willing to get. Love is not gratuitous but doesn't disappoint – the fate of the Mugunghwa, and the event that precipitated it, is as valid as it is appalling. "  —Matt Sakey, Tap-Repeatedly It was like watching a horror movie, knowing what was about to happen and curious only how awful the director's willing to get. Love is not gratuitous but doesn't disappoint – the fate of the Mugunghwa, and the event that precipitated it, is as valid as it is appalling.  " A visually stunning game with an interesting story... this game stands as an example of how a text adventure can look and feel nowadays. "  —IndieCade, 2012 Finalist A visually stunning game with an interesting story... this game stands as an example of how a text adventure can look and feel nowadays.  Uncover the mystery of what happened to the final generation aboard the generation ship Mugunghwa by reading through its dead crew's logs, with the help of a spunky AI sidekick!  Two pursuable characters. Five endings. A dark visual novel that further extends the non-linear style of Digital: A Love Story in a mystery featuring transhumanism, traditional marriage, loneliness, and cosplay.  Welcome to the future.
Alex Hogrefe is the creator of Visualizing Architecture, a blog dedicated to educating people in the art of architectural visualization. He is also part of rendering studio Design Distill, generating unique and compelling illustrations for architects around the world.  A thought that often runs through my head when working on architectural illustrations is: How can I bring more of a human touch to the image? The answer is almost always through texturing in Photoshop.  I have spent the last week illustrating an aerial perspective for my latest personal project. For this particular work, I wanted to hit almost every surface of the image with a strong texture to see what would happen. There were many areas that I would normally skip over in other illustrations but didn't in this one. The result is an image with imperfections that shows age.  Base Rendering  Texturing in the 3D environment is important, but it can be difficult to avoid "tiling" of textures. Often, my base renderings come out looking flat and "perfect," meaning the texture has no flaws. This is because there is only so much I can do with bump maps and texture attributes.  At a certain point, time spent texturing in the 3D environment could be done much faster in Photoshop. After producing so many illustrations over the years, I am starting to get a sense of what that threshold is and when I need to get out of 3D and into 2D post processing. In many cases, I need both a good texture in the 3D model combined with a good texture in Photoshop to get the right look.  Texture Zones  For this illustration, there were four areas that I focused on: the roofs of the surrounding context, the textures of my design, the streets and the sidewalks/landscape. All four of these areas feed off of one another, and if one is left untouched, then the computer's "plastic" feel is revealed and the effect is lost.  Choosing Textures  I used several images of asphalt roads to apply textures to my illustration in Photoshop. These have the right amount of grunge and imperfection and can be used in areas other than the streets. In this case, I used the asphalt textures for the rooftops of the buildings and, after I lowered the opacity, also applied them to the concrete and brick sidewalks.  Before …  … And after textures  Before-and-After Comparison  A side-by-side comparison reveals how powerful a little bit of texturing in Photoshop can be. It's elements like roads and rooftops — which I often see people ignoring in their illustrations — that I have come to realize make a big difference in giving an image that human touch. Building in these little imperfections start to trick the eye into thinking this is not a computer-generated image.  The Final Image  In this final image, I moved the colors to the warm side by using orange color overlays. As with a lot of my illustrations, I bumped up the detail and sharpness using plugins like Topaz Labs Adjust. For aerials, I typically turn off the perspective, but in this case, I left it on and increased the field of view in SketchUp to make the buildings feel taller. The perspective works here because it draws the eye to the center of the image and puts more focus on the design.  All images by Alex Hogrefe. This post first appeared on Visualizing Architecture. Enjoy this article? Check out the other features in our series on "The Art of Rendering":  Turn Your Architectural Visualization From Day to Night Using Nothing but Photoshop  How to Bring Your SketchUp Model to Life Using Nothing but Photoshop  Create a Stunning Watercolor Visual Using SketchUp, AutoCAD and Photoshop  Methanoia Reveals the Story Behind Architecture's Most Striking Visualizations  7 Magical Demonstrations of Hyper-Real Environments  When Architectural Visualization Gets It Right: Victor Enrich's Surreal Art  A Photographic Approach to Architectural Visualization  Alex Hogrefe Creates Stunning Architectural Visualizations Using SketchUp and Photoshop  4 Unique Approaches to Architectural Visualization  Architizer is building tech tools to help power your practice: Click here to sign up now. Are you a manufacturer looking to connect with architects? Click here.
Two women have challenged the constitutionality of a Canada-U.S. agreement to share the tax information of U.S. citizens resident in Canada, with the IRS.  [np_storybar title="Ottawa is violating Canadians' constitutional rights to help the U.S. collect taxes" link="http://fullcomment.nationalpost.com/2014/08/14/marni-soupcoff-ottawa-is-violating-canadians-constitutional-rights-to-help-the-u-s-collect-taxes/"%5DMarni Soupcoff: At the Americans' behest, Canada will now be sharing tax information even about Canadians who have never lived a day of their lives in the United States, never worked in the United States, and never owed the IRS a single penny. Merely having dual U.S. citizenship — for example because one's parents were Americans or one was born on U.S. soil to Canadian parents — is enough to trigger the mandatory sharing of private financial details. While one can understand Washington's desire to crack down on tax cheats, FATCA goes too far, and it's distressing that the Canadian government has so willingly stepped up to help. Keep reading.  [/np_storybar]  But an expert in U.S. tax law says that these individuals, most of whom consider themselves Canadians, could be worse off if the lawsuit succeeds.  "If the lawsuit is successful these people could find themselves cast out of the relatively genteel walled garden of the IGA (intergovernment agreement) into the stark light of FATCA [foreign account tax compliance act]," says Roy Berg, director, U.S. tax law at Calgary's Moodys Gartner Tax Law.  U.S. tax law says that all "U.S. persons" are liable for U.S. tax, regardless of where they live in the world. FATCA compels financial institutions from outside the U.S. to collect the financial information of those deemed to be U.S. persons and submit it to U.S. authorities. The law penalizes banks who fail to supply the information.  Under the Canada-U.S. agreement, which was reached in February and which took effect on July 1, the Canada Revenue Agency will provide tax information to the U.S. Internal Revenue Service about the estimated one million Americans and dual U.S.-Canadian citizens who reside in Canada. Canadian financial institutions are required to search their records for accounts held by clients who meet the definition of "U.S. person" under the law, then supply this information to the CRA, which it will pass on to the IRS.  "The plaintiffs seem to think that victory means reversion to a pre-FATCA world," Mr. Berg says. "Unless the U.S. Congress or the U.S. courts repeal or invalidate the legislation, that's not what's going to happen."  What will happen is that if Canadian courts rule that the IGA is unconstitutional, that in itself won't affect FATCA. Absent the IGA, however, any Canadian bank wishing to engage in U.S. capital markets would still be required to turn over the financial information of U.S. depositors — but directly to the IRS instead of the CRA.  In other words, invalidating the IGA would subject the plaintiffs and others in the same position to the full weight and force of FATCA's 1,700 pages.  "The IGA relieves Canadian banks and therefore their depositors from the really nasty, harsh bits of FATCA, like the requirement that the banks close the accounts of 'recalcitrant' U.S. depositors," Mr. Berg says.  To be sure, if the IGA fails, Canadian banks may face some difficulties in reporting directly to the IRS, not the least of which is non-compliance with Canadian privacy laws. But should they be unable to comply, Canadian banks would be in a serious pickle without the protection the IGA affords them.  "If Canadian banks don't comply, any payment coming to them from the U.S. then becomes subject to a 30% withholding tax — not a withholding against tax, but a 30% tax," Mr. Berg says. "As well, the bank is frozen out of U.S. capital markets and markets that conclude contracts in U.S. dollars, like the petroleum market."  The upshot is that the federal government is unlikely to stand idly by if the IGA falls. It will likely have no choice but to amend privacy or other legislation if necessary, or find some other vehicle, to enable the information transfers about U.S. citizens that will allow Canadian banks to function in U.S. markets.  [np_storybar title="U.S. tax crackdown driving more exp
I am at a convention for an organization I am involved in, and the free sponsored room I got is with two college girls. Both of these girls are seen as future leaders in our organization, and that scares me. They are easy, coarse as lava rocks, careless slobs, and well known for being constantly drunk at these functions. I didn't know I would be rooming with them until I got here.  Yesterday, the girls and two guys had a nap together in the king bed. I wouldn't have gotten into the bed with them anyway, but with my wedding right around the corner, I didn't think it was appropriate to even stay in the room, so I had to leave.  Last night, many of us stayed out networking after some late night meetings. The girls kept drinking the whole time. I came in and went to bed when the "networking" started devolving into debauchery. One of the girls didn't come back to the room at all. Well, she may have tried. I heard knocking on the door at 3 AM but by the time I got up to check it out, nobody was there. The other one--the smarter one who people seem to think has a promising career ahead--stumbled in some time after that and proceeded to have not-so-quiet shower sex with some short homely dude while I was trying to sleep. Then the guy got into the bed (I'm on the foldout couch but it's only a few feet away) and looked like he was preparing to spend the night. His paramour was still in the bathroom. I sat up and told him in no uncertain terms that I would not be sharing accommodations with a strange man, so he left.  This girl is pretty attractive, with clear skin, long hair, and a healthy weight. She's a recent college grad in her early twenties with a coveted job and strong political connections. And she's so used up that the best she could score for even a one night stand is this awkward little rat eyed man. I feel so out of place here, but it's a total affirmation of my RPW values. I cannot wait to get home to my fiancé and out of this craziness, but it saddens me that this is what feminism has brought us to.
Amongst the stat-head brain trust and regular commentariat here at EOTP this season there has been a re-occurring topic of discussion of Louis Leblanc's shots per game rate at the AHL level, as it was very high relative to his peers for a player whose surface AHL statistics were decent but unremarkable. This has lead to a question that, to the best of my knowledge, has never been asked by the internet advanced hockey stat community: What significance do AHL shot rates have for predicting NHL performance. The relative constancy of shot production rates and the transiency of shooting percentage has long been established at the NHL level. Likewise the question of how AHL scoring translates to the NHL has been fairly extensively covered, starting with Gabe Desjardins ' simple AHL to NHL equivalency (multiply AHL scoring by .44) to Robert Vollman's more extensive look at the factor of age in translation http://www.puckprospectus.com/article.php?articleid=1079, or refinements in splitting even strength from other scoring when making comparisons.  The idea that AHL shot rate may be relevant was encouraged by looking at Max Pacioretty, whose AHL and NHL rates tracked closely and whose NHL scoring explosion was presaged by his Ovechkin-like (5+ per game) shooting dominance in his final AHL half season.  With all this in mind, I attempted to discover the answer to this little asked and unanswered question for the hockey "fancy stats" community: Does a player's AHL shot rate matter for NHL play and if so, what is the relationship between the two?  To come up with an answer, I decided to look at the shots per game rates of players that had made the transition from the AHL to the NHL after the 2004 lockout. This conforms the study to the relatively heavier studied post-lockout NHL era and coincides with the period over which the AHL has tracked individual shot data for their players. Players were selected from the pool of forwards that were active in the 2011-12 NHL season. As a criteria for selection, players must have played more than 25 games in both leagues post-lockout which lead to a data set of 113 players to study. For players who simply played in the AHL one year and the NHL the next, the shot rate is compared from both seasons. For players who played in both leagues in one season in their transition from AHL to NHL, transition seasons under 20 games are ignored and two seasons compared as if they played in one league one year and the other the next. For the more complicated players that had multiple consecutive seasons of playing significant (10+) games in both leagues, the results from each season in the separate leagues are added together as if they were one season each and compared against each other.  This technique results in a database of 113 players with an AHL and NHL shots per game rate. The data graphed results in the following chart:  The results follow a nice linear pattern, albeit with large variance. From the trend line we can see that the relationship between two rates breaks down to AHL shot rates converting into the NHL rate multiplied by .5607, or in other terms, on average ~56% of an AHL player's shot rate is maintained in the transition to the higher league. From our R squared value we can say that a player's AHL shot is 0.36 predictive of his NHL rate. This indicates that there is a notable relationship between the two values but the AHL rate is far from being the sole dominating factor in NHL shot production. This makes sense, as a player's talents will be a major factor in how he fares in each league but ice-time, special teams usage and especially linemates since AHL graduates rarely are the "drivers of play" on their lines in their rookie seasons, in each league are bound to be major influences.  Using the same data set to look at the other component of goal scoring, shooting percentage, we'll examine if that notoriously fickle element in NHL goal scoring remains as such in the transition across leagues:  As you can see, shooting percentage has a far weaker relationship in the year to year transition across leagues. On average players in the NHL shoot at .79 the rate as they did in the AHL, but there is very little correlation for individuals between how they shot in one league in one year as opposed to in the other league in the next. A finding largely in line with studies on shooting percentage at the NHL level. Multiplying .56 by .79, we get .44, or exactly the currently understood NHL equivalence for points scoring in the AHL as the NHL, which indicates that there should be no gross errors in the calculated AHL to NHL relationships and that goal scoring is equivalent to point scoring for the transitions between the two leagues.  How does the player who inspired this interest fare by our results? Leblanc's 112 shots in 31 games puts the youngster in pretty good position. Only 6 NHL players out-
Eleven iguanas heading into a veterinarian's office might sound like the setup for a pretty good bar joke, but that actually was the scene Saturday morning at the Dundee Animal Hospital.  For Saturday was the day for Rose and Jimmy Hunter of Elgin to bring the reptiles to the East Dundee office for their annual checkups. Actually, this marked the first time the couple had brought the entire group together — and, but for the largest one who weighs in at 14 pounds, in large plastic totes.  The Hunters have so many of the animals because they turned a significant part of their home into a sanctuary for iguanas, an endeavor they chronicle on their website, www.houseofig.com, and on a Facebook page.  "Once they come in, we don't find new homes," Rose Hunter said of the animals. "We are looking to change that this year, as we are running out of space and would love for these guys to bring joy to others."  The Hunters took to keeping iguanas more than 10 years ago, after meeting in June 2005 while playing the online game "EverQuest."  "My character Reyna, a druid, died and his character Emmanuelle, a cleric, brought me back to life," Rose said. "Jimmy lived in Tulsa at the time, and we talked every day after that day. He moved (to Elgin) in March 2006. We married on Sept. 13, 2008."  Prior to Jimmy moving to Illinois in November 2005, the Hunters were at Jimmy's relatives' home, "and I saw this small iguana laying lifeless in the bottom of the aquarium. I knew something was very wrong and asked Jimmy to pick it up and put it in a box so we could take it to the vet and have it put down. I never thought it would make it," Rose recalled.  The Hunters have so many of the animals because they turned a significant part of their home into a sanctuary for iguanas, an endeavor they chronicle on their website, www.houseofig.com, and on a Facebook page. The Hunters have so many of the animals because they turned a significant part of their home into a sanctuary for iguanas, an endeavor they chronicle on their website, www.houseofig.com, and on a Facebook page. SEE MORE VIDEOS  Rose said she called four area veterinarians who all were reluctant to see the animal. Still, the couple drove to the closest one.  "I don't take the answer 'no' really well, as it was life or death," Rose said. "We got to the vet and showed them the iguana (named Tulsa). They took it in back. I was expecting to just sign the paper to have her euthanized, but they instead told me to go back to talk to the doctor."  The vet explained there was a piece of bark caught in the animal's throat that had caused a very large abscess.  "He removed the abscess, and now it was time to nurse her back to health," Rose said. "This is how we came to rescue and have as a pet our first iguana."  The Hunters had Tulsa until she died in August 2008, and Rose said she missed the pet so much the couple decided to go and look at an iguana named Jade.  "Her photo was in our vet's office, and her owner was looking for a good home for her. Now, it's 2017, and we have 11 iguanas," Rose said.  As for why people no longer want to have iguanas they got as pets, Rose said the typical reasons are "space, time and money. They are not cheap animals to keep, especially if you don't have your husbandry down."  Rose said the most unusual circumstance for taking in an iguana involved one named Abe. Abe was living with a college-aged woman from Barrington who was having a hard time juggling school and Abe's size and aggression.  "He is the only iguana we have taken in that actually lunged at our faces to try to get to us. He was not a happy camper," Rose said. "Now, he is as content as a lizard should be."  Abe's situation also illustrated an issue the couple finds troubling: people getting lizards as prizes at carnivals.  Veterinarian Eileen O'Brien said people should do their research first before getting any pet. With iguanas, some might think it would be cool to have one, then they can't care for the animal five years or so down the road when it's fully grown, she said. That leads to a broken situation for both the pet's owner and the animal.  "Having an iguana is not for the faint of heart," O'Brien said.  "The biggest challenge is getting their care or husbandry down
Bitpop pioneers Anamanaguchi have collaborated with the blue haired virtual pop star Hatsune Miku on a track titled "Miku" that they expect will help make the Japanese vocaloid a global phenomenon.  ADVERTISEMENT  Recorded between a basement in New York and a state-of-the-art studio in Tokyo, the track finds Miku — who has a newly expanded English language library to draw from — in the midst of an existential tailspin of sorts, considering in song for the first time her purpose and being. Miku, Miku, what's it like to be you? she wonders.
Pope Francis spent the weekend in and around Mexico's capital highlighting issues such as corruption, and the failure of the Mexican Church hierarchy to do enough about the suffering caused by the country's drug wars. Now he is going further afield in an effort to show he is serious about putting poor and peripheral places at the center of his papacy.  The Pope is spending Monday in Chiapas, scene of the 1994 Zapatista uprising in defense of indigenous rights. On Tuesday he goes to to Michoacán, where Mexico's war on drugs started in 2006, and armed vigilantes rose up against organized crime in 2013. The last stop is Ciudad Juárez, which was once the murder capital of the world and, located just across the tightly-controlled border with Texas, also serves as a symbol of truncated migrant dreams.  VICE News spoke with three priests from the three states about their work and their lives in places where chickens are sacrificed in church, farmers seek blessing for growing drugs, church bells get stolen, and extreme violence and poverty are everywhere.  Related: Pope Francis Touches Down in Mexico Today, But John Paul II Still Gets All the Love  Father Pedro Arriaga in San Juan Chamula, Chiapas  Pedro Arriaga. Photo by David Agren.  Father Pedro Arriaga tells a story about how he once inadvertently snapped a photo of a local indigenous leader while fiddling with a new iPhone. He had to delete the photograph and plead forgiveness.  Arriaga presides over a parish in Chamula, one of Mexico's toughest towns for Catholic priests because of the strength of indigenous traditions, and the power of the local authorities who enforce rules such as a ban on photographing leaders, or statues of saints.  Practices inside the whitewashed St. John the Baptist church include the familiar veneration of those saints with votive candles, but also the cleansing of bad vibes by moving eggs over people's bodies, and ceremonies in which the necks of live chickens are snapped. And there is lots of alcohol.  "For some priests this provokes a reaction as if it were some sort of witchcraft", says Arriaga. The 69-year-old says that for him the syncretism shows "what's beautiful in indigenous traditional beliefs," that help people "find God" in their own way.  Arriaga also stresses that trying to evangelize in Chiapas without being sensitive to indigenous traditions is one of the main reasons why the state has the highest level of dissersion to evangelical congregations in Mexico.  Chamulas is a short 15-minute drive from San Cristobal de las Casas where the Pope is due to celebrate mass on Monday. It has been announced that the service will include indigenous languages, and that the pontiff wants to draw attention to a population often living in extreme poverty and facing daily racism.  Priests in the Diocese of San Cristobal de las Casas say the Mexican government did not want the Pope to visit Chiapas. Government sources say he was simply warned of logistical concerns, but was always free to go where he wanted.  Arriaga suspects the government sought to keep Chiapas off the Pope's agenda in order not to stir up latent indigenous issues or highlight the extreme poverty that still pervades the state where Zapatista rebels still control pockets of territory, 22 years after their uprising that drew attention to centuries of discrimination and exploitation suffered by the indigenous population there.  Chiapas governor Manuel Velasco is young, publicity-focused, and relentlessly positive in a way reminiscent of President Enrique Peña Nieto. Federal statistics, however, show poverty at the same high level over the last two decades, in spite of a glut of social programs and infrastructure spending.  "This [government] charm offensive comes undone when you hear the Pope speak," Father Arriaga said. "His homilies have a more radical tone and denounce corruption."  Related: 'Subcomandante Marcos No Longer Exists:' Zapatista Leader Retires His Nom de Guerre  The Pope's visit also vindicates the radical work of Bishop Samuel Ruiz, the state's most prominent churchman.  Between 1960 and his retirement in 2000, Ruiz sought to put indigenous communities at the center of his pastoral work. This brought accusations from the local elites - who often employed the indigenous in exploitative conditions on coffee farms – that he was a "communist."  The Vatican also took issue with Ruiz ordaining married indigenous men as deacons, in an effort to make the church more inclusive for the state's Mayan peoples, who often don't speak Spanish.  Ruiz also came up against obstacles from the indigenous elites in Chamula who saw the formation of socially aware residents as a threat to their leadership, and their religious use of liquor.  His former No. 2, Father Gonzalo Ituarte, recalls being instructed by
Manufacturers of airport security equipment have a message for travelers who fear they will have to give up laptops and tablet computers on international flights: They have a solution.  At least four of the largest companies making screening devices say they are developing scanners so much better at detecting explosives than existing X-ray machines that passengers could leave laptops, other electronics and even liquids in their bags, vastly simplifying airport security.  "It's a no brainer," said Joseph Paresi, chief executive officer of Integrated Defense & Security Solutions Inc., which has developed one of the new scanning machines that has passed initial U.S. government testing. "It's not if. It's when it's going to happen."  But the speed with which U.S., European and other security agencies can put them into widespread use remains an open question. After being burned by attempts to roll out new screening equipment in the past — such as having to warehouse hundreds of so-called puffer machines designed to detect explosives because they didn't perform well in real-world conditions a decade ago — the Transportation Security Administration has instituted multiple layers of performance tests.  And Congress hasn't appropriated funds for large purchases of the machines. Adding the devices, which list for several hundred thousand dollars each, at thousands of airport security lines in just the U.S. could cost $1 billion or more.  The U.S. Department of Homeland Security in March banned electronic devices larger than a mobile phone from airliner cabins on flights from 10 Middle East and North Africa airports to the U.S., citing concerns that terrorists had created ways to conceal explosives in them. Since then, the agency has been considering expanding the ban to Europe — over the objections of the European Commission and air carriers.  At the same time, TSA is conducting tests of closer screening procedures for electronics at 10 U.S. airports with an eye toward expanding them nationwide.  Groups representing airlines and airports say they are hopeful that new technology could ease the need for the new security measures.  "The ban on large personal electronic devices in the cabin has certainly highlighted the importance of governments stepping up their support for more capable checkpoint screening technology to respond to emerging threats," Perry Flint, spokesman for the International Air Transport Association trade group, said in an interview. IATA represents 265 airlines around the world.  There is optimism over the ability of these machines — which borrow computed tomography or CT scan technology from the medical world to create a high-definition, three-dimension view inside a bag — to address the new threats.  The TSA has tested two of the devices and plans to place one of each in airports later this year to study how they operate in the trying environment of airport security lanes. The devices are built by IDSS and L3 Technologies Inc.  "CT technology has the potential to significantly improve security as well as the checkpoint experience for travelers," TSA spokesman Michael England said in an emailed statement. "However, while this technology has shown promise, more testing is needed before it can be rolled out nationwide."  The current X-ray machines at airports shoot two views of a bag or bin, providing TSA screeners a color view of the interior. While superior to earlier generations of X-ray machines, they have their limitations. In tests by government agents, screeners frequently miss weapons and simulated bombs.  CT machines provide a far more detailed picture of a bag's contents. A spinning X-ray camera can capture more than 1,000 images of a piece of luggage from different angles, allowing a computer to create a high-definition, three-dimensional view. By calculating the densities of material, even small amounts of explosives can be automatically detected.  The same CT technology is used in machines installed at airports after the Sept. 11, 2001 attacks to detect explosives in checked bags.  In promotional material, L3's Security & Detection Systems division said its CT checkpoint scanner could streamline airport screening. The device has a lower false-alarm rate than current X-ray systems, which decreases the need for time-consuming, hand searches of bags, the company said.  Because passengers could leave laptops and other devices in bags, it reduces the number of bins that must be scanned, which also improves efficiency, according to the company.  Smiths Detection Inc., the Smiths Group division that makes security screening devices, is making a CT scanner that it will submit to TSA for testing, company President Dan Gelston said in an emailed statement. The company uses CT technology in its checked-bag screening machines.  Analogic Corp., a Massachusetts-based company making medical and security equipment, has also developed a CT scanner for airports, according to the company's website.  While there may be logistical issues installing the new machines, which are heavier than traditional X-ray devices and require more power, airports would welcome an upgrade, said Christopher Bidwell, vice president of security at Airports Council International-North America.  
Democrat Mary Burke (right) is the leading contender to face Gov. Scott Walker in the 2014 election. Credit: Associated Press  By of the  A new Marquette University Law School poll released Monday continues to show a tight race between Gov. Scott Walker and Democratic challenger Mary Burke in the 2014 governor's race, with Walker at 47% and Burke at 41%.  The number may reflect partisanship as much as anything. While voters have strong opinions on the governor — 49% view him favorably and 44% don't — around two-thirds said they haven't heard enough about Burke to form an opinion. Just 12% view Burke favorably and 18% have an unfavorable view.  Burke, a former Trek Bicycle Corp. executive and former state commerce secretary, is the only announced Democrat in the race.  The poll of 802 registered Wisconsin voters was conducted Jan. 20-23. It had a margin of error of plus or minus 31/2 percentage points. About 40% of the poll was conducted on cellphones and seven-eighths of the polling was completed before the governor's "state of the state" address last week.  The results compare with Marquette poll results released in late October that showed Republican Walker had 47% and Burke at 45%.  But beneath the headline numbers in the governor's race, there's a fascinating snapshot of Wisconsin voters who said the state is headed in the right direction yet don't believe that Walker can fulfill his pledge of adding 250,000 jobs in his first term.  Voters also would like to see a cut in their property taxes and wouldn't mind if such cuts are funded by increased income taxes on the wealthy.  Sixty-two percent also favor boosting the $7.25 an hour minimum wage, while 35% are opposed.  Thirty-three percent back a boost to $9 an hour, and 25% support a $10 an hour minimum wage.  "I think you see the makings of a real horse race here," said Charles Franklin, the poll director.  Fifty-four percent said Wisconsin was headed in the right direction and 44% said it was headed on the wrong track.  Forty-nine percent of those polled said the budget situation for the state is better now than it was a few years ago, compared with 26% who said it was the same and 20% who said it was worse.  Yet only 14% in the poll said they believed the state would reach Walker's pledge of creating 250,000 jobs in his first term, while 79% said the target would not be met.  Jobs are a key issue in the campaign. And so are taxes.  And here, the results were fascinating.  Asked which one tax they would like cut, 42% answered the property tax, 34% said the income tax and 22% said the sales tax.  There was almost no difference by income for the preference to cut the property tax, Franklin said.  When it comes to paying for tax cuts, though, voters aren't keen on restructuring taxes, with just 39% willing to increase the sales tax to cut property taxes and 39% accepting increased sales taxes for lower income taxes.  But 64% of those polled were willing to see a boost in income taxes on those earning more than $250,000 so that property taxes could be lowered.  Campaigns respond  The two campaigns had quick reactions to the results.  Wisconsin GOP Executive Director Joe Fadness said in a statement:  "We are pleased that the majority of voters agree that Wisconsin is moving in the right direction, yet we continue to believe that this will be a tight race as out-of-state special interests and a millionaire challenger are ready to spend what it takes to distort Governor Walker's positive reforms."  Fadness added:  "We are confident that voters will continue to stand with Governor Walker, who is moving Wisconsin forward through major tax relief, economic growth and sound fiscal management."  Joe Zepecki, spokesman for the Burke campaign, appeared to downplay the polling that showed Burke trailing.  "Thirty seven. Forty-five. Forty-eight. Three numbers that matter a lot more to Wisconsin's middle class than polling 281 days before an election," Zepecki said in a statement.  "Scott Walker hasn't created the 250,000 new jobs he promised and his economic record — 37th in job creation, 45th in job growth prospects and 48th in new business starts — is nowhere near good enough," Zepecki said.  Zepecki added that as Burke "continues introducing herself to voters as a proven job creator committed to raising the minimum wage, strengthening public schools, making college more affordable, and improving job training programs so that Wisconsin workers have the skills employers need — voters will see the clear choice in this election and vote for new leadership."  Other polling results  
From Bulbapedia, the community-driven Pokémon encyclopedia.  There have been numerous controversies regarding the Pokémon franchise in its various forms and media.  In the TCG  Perceived Nazi imagery  Original Japanese print  International print  Members of the Jewish community accused Nintendo of using an offensive image in the Japanese version of Koga's Ninja Trick. The image in question, features an omote manji, a left-facing version of the swastika.  The Western world generally associates the swastika with the fascist and racist policies of Nazi Germany during the course of World War II, as well as hate, prejudice and white supremacy in general. However, the swastika has its roots as a symbol of peace and good luck by many cultures. The earliest form of the swastika discovered was one used in Ancient India. It also was found in cultures that had no connection with India, such as Native American and First Nation cultures. It was because of its long and ancient history that Adolf Hitler adopted it as the Nazi Party symbol, as he felt it to be—among other things—a connection to Aryan ancestors who lived in Ancient India.  Since World War II, however, its use has diminished, but it is still commonly used by other cultures who either didn't have any contact with the Nazis or who still identify the swastika more as a symbol of peace than as a symbol of hate. In India and its neighboring countries, the swastika represents love and mercy, as well as wealth and good fortune. In Asian countries, such as China, Japan, and South Korea, the swastika can be found on maps to represent Buddhist temples. In all of these nations, the swastika can also be found on all kinds of media, businesses, buildings, and clothing like any other symbol. However, it is because of its liberal use that the swastika can create international miscommunications, such as its use on the Japanese version of Koga's Ninja Trick.   In the anime  Perceived Nazi imagery  In All Things Bright and Beautifly!, a Team Rocket fantasy, involving Jessie, James, Meowth, and many Team Rocket Grunts raising their hands in a manner somewhat similar to the Hitler salute, was edited out in the English dub of the anime, with the grunts no longer raising their hands. Despite this, Meowth's arm remains unedited in the dub.  Original Japanese version  Dubbed English version  Pokémon Shock  An episode of the Pokémon anime broadcast in December 1997 on Japanese television induced photosensitive epileptic seizures in a substantial number of Japanese viewers, many of which required medical assistance. As a result, the episode was not broadcast overseas and never shown in Japan again, and the incident caused the anime to go into a temporary hiatus. Every Pokémon episode that aired up until this episode, including the opening, was edited by lighting certain scenes, removing or changing fast-flashing scenes and more. The original version of the episodes have never been shown again, except by mistake on Hulu Japan.  Violence  This section contains old or outdated information, or has not been updated in a while. Please check the content of this section and update it as required.  Although 4Kids and TAJ allow for some cartoon violence in the anime, the following episodes contain scenes that were deemed to be "too violent", and thus were cut from the English broadcast:  Scenes like these are common in Japanese animation, and are intended for comic relief purposes. They are similar to scenes in Western animation such as Looney Tunes and Tom and Jerry, where characters get hit by extremely heavy objects and are completely fine afterward.   In the games  Perceived Nazi imagery  International DP Registeel  European DP/Worldwide PtHGSS Registeel  In European releases of Pokémon Diamond and Pearl, the sprite art for Registeel is altered slightly. In the Japanese, Korean, and English releases, Registeel's arm is extended. In non-English European versions an altered sprite is used, depicting it with both of its arms down, presumably due to the original pose's resemblance to the Roman salute, infamously used by (and therefore commonly associated with) the German Nazi Party. In all versions of Pokémon Platinum and Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver, the revised sprite is used.   Gambling  The Goldenrod Game Corner in Western HeartGold and SoulSilver  Over the years, there has been a growing distaste towards gambling and the exposure of it to minors. Due to the unpredictable "risk-it-all" nature of the activity and the high impressionability of youths, more and more people have voiced their opposition towards allowing minors to partake in gambling and/or gambling-esque activities, with gambling in video games falling under particular scrutiny. As a result, the Pan-European Game Information (PEGI) organization implemented stricter guidelines that limited gambling to adult-oriented video games and
When eggs develop without fertilization, science calls it "parthenogenesis." Although rare in vertebrates, some reptiles, such as some whiptail lizards, some microteiids and some geckos, are capable of it. To date, no Rhacodactylus species has been recorded as parthenogenetic.
Featured Groups they've got spots open... hop in!  Bravo Company 638 | PS4 | casual | members: 98 | avg. age: 44 | mics required | Eastern Time (US & Canada)  This group usually plays between 03:00 PM PST and 09:00 PM PST  Delta Company 582 | PS4 | casual | members: 89 | avg. age: 43 | mics required | parents  This group usually plays between 09:00 AM PST and 03:00 PM PST  Alpha Company 807 | Xbox One | casual | members: 98 | avg. age: 39 | mics required | Sydney  This group usually plays between 09:00 PM PST and 03:00 AM PST  Echo Company 393 | PS4 | casual | members: 89 | avg. age: 38 | mics required  This group usually plays between 03:00 PM PST and 09:00 PM PST  Alpha Company 290 | Xbox One | casual | members: 71 | avg. age: 29 | mics required  This group usually plays between 03:00 PM PST and 09:00 PM PST  Echo Company 59 | PS4 | casual | members: 97 | avg. age: 37 | mics required | Central Time (US & Canada)  This group usually plays between 09:00 AM PST and 03:00 PM PST  Bravo Company 24 | Xbox One | casual | members: 89 | avg. age: 32 | mics required | Eastern Time (US & Canada)  This group usually plays between 03:00 PM PST and 09:00 PM PST  Charlie Company 622 | PS4 | casual | members: 98 | avg. age: 35 | mics required | parents | college students | Central Time (US & Canada)  This group usually plays between 03:00 PM PST and 09:00 PM PST  Delta Company 297 | Xbox One | casual | members: 88 | avg. age: 36 | mics required  This group usually plays between 03:00 PM PST and 09:00 PM PST  Charlie Company 439 | Xbox One | casual | members: 89 | avg. age: 37 | mics required | Central Time (US & Canada)  This group usually plays between 03:00 PM PST and 09:00 PM PST  Delta Company 294 | PS4 | casual | members: 89 | avg. age: 45 | mics required | London  This group usually plays between 09:00 AM PST and 03:00 PM PST  The Monarchy's Hand | Xbox One | casual | members: 28 | avg. age: 37 | mics required | Eastern Time (US & Canada)  This group usually plays between 09:00 AM PST and 03:00 PM PST  Charlie Company 283 | Xbox One | casual | members: 89 | avg. age: 27 | mics required | Eastern Time (US & Canada)  This group usually plays between 03:00 PM PST and 09:00 PM PST  Veterans of the Grind! | Xbox One | casual | members: 89 | avg. age: 40 | mics required | Eastern Time (US & Canada)  This group usually plays between 03:00 PM PST and 09:00 PM PST  Echo Company 892 | PS4 | casual | members: 89 | avg. age: 24 | mics required  This group usually plays between 09:00 PM PST and 03:00 AM PST  Alpha Company 328 | Xbox One | casual | members: 89 | avg. age: 36 | mics required | Central Time (US & Canada)  This group usually plays between 03:00 PM PST and 09:00 PM PST  Crowded Gaming | Xbox One | casual | members: 27 | avg. age: 39 | mics required | America/Detroit  This group usually plays between 09:00 AM PST and 03:00 PM PST  Echo Company 730 | Xbox One | casual | members: 88 | avg. age: 34 | mics required  This group usually plays between 03:00 PM PST and 09:00 PM PST  Alpha Company 621 | PS4 | casual | members: 89 | avg. age: 35 | mics required | UTC  This group usually plays between 09:00 PM PST and 03:00 AM PST  Delta Company 247 | Xbox One | casual | members: 89 | avg. age: 38 | mics required  This group usually plays between 03:00 AM PST and 09:00 AM PST
Ann Taylor  17 Palmer Square West, Princeton, NJ  609-924-8335  ~ A women's clothing store supplying updated classics which provide a feminine, stylish, and polished look for all lifestyles  Anthropologie  Princeton Market Fair 3535 Route 1 South, Princeton, NJ  609-452-0550  ~ A beautiful store providing women's clothing, lingerie, accessories and home items; dedicated to intricate detail and superior craftsmanship  Athleta  Princeton Market Fair 3535 Route 1 South, Princeton, NJ  609-452-0372  ~Fashionable athletic and yoga wear  Au Courant Opticians  57 Palmer Square West, Princeton, NJ  609-921-9600  ~ Locally Owned Independent Business ~ A variety of eyewear and sunglasses including Cartier, Gucci, Lunar, Oliver Peoples, Paul Smith and many more  Banana Republic  Princeton Market Fair 3535 Route 1 South, Princeton, NJ  609-921-8111  ~ Men's and women's clothing, accessories, shoes, and personal care products of elevated design and fashion at approachable prices  Barbour  67 Palmer Square West, Princeton, NJ  609-454-3010  ~ British clothing store specializing in waxed cotton and quilted jackets, knitwear, shirts, trousers, headwear and accessories.  Bella Boutique  Princeton Shopping Center, 301 N. Harrison St, Princeton, NJ  (609) 454-5680  ~ Locally Owned Independent Business ~ Bella Boutique offers a highly edited selection of the season's best fashion for women.  Brooks Brothers  17 Palmer Square East, Princeton, NJ 08542  609-688-6879  ~ Classic business and casual clothing for men, women and children.  Botari  63 Palmer Square West, Princeton, NJ  609-430-3031  ~ Women's accessory store featuring brands like Orla Kiely, Longchamp and Michael Kors.  Bucks County Dry Goods  20 Nassau Street, Princeton, NJ  609-252-0036  ~ Locally Owned Independent Business ~ Women's clothing and accessories as well as new and mid-century home furnishings, each of which reflect the company's love of fashion, art and good design  Club Monaco  46 Nassau Street, Princeton NJ  609-921-0820  ~ Modern yet timeless clothing and accessories  Gap / Gap Kids / Baby Gap  Princeton Market Fair, 3535 Rte 1 South, Princeton, NJ  609-520-8427  ~ Casual clothing for men, women, children, and babies  Greene Street Consignment  162 Nassau Street, Princeton NJ  609-924-1990  ~ Locally Owned Independent Business ~ Greene Street Consignment has become a favorite destination for savvy shoppers seeking designer labels at thrifty prices.  Hedy Shepard Limited  175 Nassau St, Princeton, NJ  609-921-0582  ~Shop at Hedy Shepard if you want to be in style and look your best. The owners Lynn and Rachel will give you personal attention and you will always get the truth from them. They won't tell you something looks great when it doesn't just to get a sale which is a refreshing touch!  Hulit's Shoes  142 Nassau St, Princeton, NJ 08542  (609) 924-1952  ~ Family owned and operated shoe store since 1929. Huilit's specializes in shoes for the entire family. Women's, Men's, Children's Casual & Dress & Athletic Footwear.  Idilia's Pre't A' Porter  195 Nassau St, #9, Princeton, NJ  609-683-0200  ~Idilia has come to Princeton with a store that has a great point of view. Contemporary brands that are affordable in a lovely atmosphere.  J. Crew  1 Palmer Square, Princeton, NJ  609-924-0011  ~ American brand clothing and accessories for men, women, and children known for its sophisticated, fun styles  J. McLaughlin  17 Witherspoon St, Princeton, NJ  609-497-9717  ~ From the moment the doors opened J.McLaughlin established itself as a classic American brand featuring a flair for bold colors and signature prints.  Barbour  67 Palmer Square, Princeton, NJ 08542  (609) 454-3010  ~British brand's classic waxed jackets & country apparel for men, women & children.  L
Abstract : Dairy foods contain complex nutrients which interact with the host. Yet, evolution of lactase persistence has divided the human species into those that can or cannot digest lactose in adulthood. Such a ubiquitous trait has differential effects on humanity. The literature is reviewed to explore how the divide affects lactose handling by lactase non persistent persons. There are two basic differences in digesters. Firstly, maldigesters consume less dairy foods, and secondly, excess lactose is digested by colonic microflora. Lactose intolerance in maldigesters may occur with random lactose ingestion. However, lactose intolerance without maldigestion tends to detract from gaining a clear understanding of the mechanisms of symptoms formation and leads to confusion with regards to dairy food consumption. The main consequence of intolerance is withholding dairy foods. However, regular dairy food consumption by lactase non persistent people could lead to colonic adaptation by the microbiome. This process may mimic a prebiotic effect and allows lactase non persistent people to consume more dairy foods enhancing a favorable microbiome. This process then could lead to alterations in outcome of diseases in response to dairy foods in lactose maldigesters. The evidence that lactose is a selective human prebiotic is reviewed and current links between dairy foods and some diseases are discussed within this context. Colonic adaptation has not been adequately studied, especially with modern microbiological techniques.  1. Introduction The ability or inability of adults to digest the disaccharide lactose into its components, glucose and galactose, divides humanity into two Mendelian inherited phenotypes. The dominant emergence of lactase persistence (LP) some 7500–10,000 years ago occurred almost simultaneously in Europe, Africa and the Middle East [1,2]. Those populations that domesticated milk animals and consumed their milk eventually showed higher frequencies of mutations associated with a higher expression of the enzyme lactase in adults [3]. Dominant mutations occurred in the lactase promoter region upstream from lactase phlorizin hydrolase on chromosome 2q21 [1,2] retaining intestinal lactase into adulthood. In ancient times, it is hypothesized that consumption of dairy foods may have added a nutritional advantage to such populations [4]. In arid conditions, drinking fluid milk may have allowed desert dwellers an additional source of water [3]. In northern Europe, populations exposed to low sunlight with low skin synthesis of vitamin D may have derived ability to consume more calcium through dairy products and avert risks of Rickets [5]. It is estimated that lactase underwent a strong and recent signal of positive selection [6]. In this review we will discuss the concept of "adaptation" to dairy foods (DFs). Although different DFs contain variable amounts of lactose [7] the emphasis is on the total content of lactose consumed, rather than individual components (milk, yogurt cheese and others). The reason is that it is lactose which may the adapting nutrient in lactase non persistent persons (LNP). Adaptation refers to two processes. The first is the adaptation to milk drinking based on ancestral herding practices. The second, which is primarily discussed in this review, refers to lactose maldigesters (lactase non persistent people with less than 10 units/g of intestinal lactase; LNP) who despite their genetic status, regularly consume DFs and as a result have improved lactose handling. Colonic adaptation in LNP people likely results in altered microbiome and metabolome (discussed below). These alterations then may impact on health issues. Improved symptoms of lactose intolerance (LI) and the altered microbome are closely linked in this paradigm. Prebiotics and probiotics are briefly discussed to illustrate their potential in affecting various diseases. We then argue that lactose qualifies as a prebiotic. We finally discuss the variable effects of dairy foods (DFs) on different diseases and argue that the possible prebiotic lactose effect in LNP populations are not adequately explored. Colonic adaptation in LNP persons may introduce a confounder if LP/LNP is ignored, because the mechanisms of DF effects may be different in some diseases in the two populations. There are differences in the way LNP persons handle lactose containing DFs. Firstly, countries with a high proportion of LNP populations consume less DFs than countries with high proportions of LP populations [8]. The second occurs after regular DF consumption and is associated with a reduction both in symptoms [9] and in bacterial hydrogen production specifically measured by the lactose breath hydrogen test [10]. These two latter features are linked. The less the symptoms of LI in LNP persons the greater the quantity of lactose containing DFs may be consumed. In turn, continued lactose intake may support the altered microbiome/metabolome in the long term. Lactose containing products are perceived as primary culprits of gastrointestinal symptoms. Intolerance of lactose and hence many dairy foods have been at the forefront of this notion. A strict definition of LI endorsed by a National Institute of
Liquid Caffeine  Caffeine Levels 500 mg CAFFEINE per fl. oz serving mlfl. oz CAFFEINE LEVEL  DANGEROUS Compare  Liquid Caffeine™ Concentrate (formerly 5150 Juice) should be used with extreme care.  Liquid Caffeine is an unsweetened, unflavored caffeine concentrate that is intended to turn any drink into an energy drink.  It should never be consumed straight and is listed as our 2nd most danergous caffeinated product.  Sizes of Pure Liquid Caffeine  The Gallon jug contains 64,000mg of caffeine or 128, 1 floz 500mg shots. The 32 oz jug contains 16,000mg of caffeine or 32, 1 floz 500mg shots. The 16 floz. size jug contains 8,000mg of caffeine or 16, 1 floz 500mg shots.  Pure Liquid caffeine is also sold in a Sweet version with slightly less caffeine per fluid ounce at 475mg.  Warning: Be careful to measure this product carefully!  Pure Liquid Caffeine is not suitable for minors or those sensitive to caffeine and should be used only by healthy adults who understand how to measure properly.  Ingredients in Liquid Caffeine Per 1 floz. Serving Water, Caffeine: 500mg , and Sodium Benzoate (preserves the freshness). Sugar content: Contains no sugar. Compare Sugar Content  Similar Items Vital 4U Liquid Energy 155mg   Caffeine Concentration  Liquid Caffeine contains 500.00 mgs of caffeine per fluid ounce (1690.70mg/100 ml).
Millions of native oysters are to be put into the Solent, once the site of Europe's largest oyster fishery.  The five-year project aims first to restore a thriving oyster population to the waters between the south coast and Isle of Wight. Oyster beds provide habitat for many other species and the shellfish filter vast volumes of water – 200 litres per oyster – helping to clean up pollution. Once re-established, significant oyster fishing could resume.  "We hope this programme will have a transformational effect on the Solent in the long-term," said Tim Glover, at the Blue Marine Foundation, which is leading the project. A million young oysters will be put into the Solent in 2017, in places where they cannot be legally fished. A further 10,000 are being put in special cages in harbours, from where they can send out larvae.  "It's a really great project and it could have a phenomenal impact," said Jo Preston, a marine biologist at the University of Portsmouth who is monitoring the project. "Without a helping hand it is very unlikely the oysters are going to get going again."  Bringing oysters back home to Britain Read more  Oysters have been fished in the UK since at least Roman times and at its peak in the 1920s 40 million oysters were eaten each year, with the abundance leading to the mollusc being known as a poor man's food. But by the 1960s this had fallen to 3 million oysters a year.  The population in the Solent crashed again recently, with the annual catch falling from 200 tonnes in 2007 to just 20 tonnes in 2011 – about 250,000 shells – and oyster fishing was banned in the Solent in 2013. "It's a perfect storm of overfishing, habitat destruction, dredging, climate change, disease, invasive species and quite possibly pollution," said Preston.  One key problem is the American slipper limpet, which has taken over the oysters' habitat as they have declined and now dominates. A switch back to oyster beds is needed for the overall health of the marine ecosystem, said Preston: "The biodiversity associated with the native oyster is far greater than that associated with the slipper limpet. It's also brilliant for other fisheries as it becomes a refuge for juvenile fish and lots of other things grow on top of oysters."  Facebook Twitter Pinterest Aerial view of the Solent strait between the Isle of Wight and the south coast of England. Photograph: Peter Barritt/Robert Harding  Oyster restoration projects are taking place around the UK, particularly in Essex and parts of Scotland and Wales. But the Solent project is one of the biggest and the first to use cages, provided by the MDL Marinas company. These hang from harbours and protect the oysters, which can then reproduce and send a "massive input of larvae into the Solent", according to Preston.  The cages have been tested over the last year, with some success in Portsmouth harbour. "I thought they were all going to die – I mean, it's filthy there," said Preston. "But we had only 7% mortality – I was astonished." However, another test cage in Langton harbour was all but wiped out due to a toxic algal bloom, possibly connected to sewage overflows after storms.  The project costs about £250,000 per year, funded by charitable donations, and will use commercial hatcheries to grow up the oysters to about 5cm before being released. "By the end of five years we hope we will have done our ground work to make sure the oysters are installed again," said Glover. "But it is probably five to 10 years before we see a real, thriving oyster stock in the Solent."  Preston is optimistic that a significant oyster fishery could return in the future. "Absolutely, if they don't open it up too fast and too soon, and as long as there are protected grounds where they are not fished, then I think there is every hope of a robust fishery," she said.  Most oysters eaten in the UK today are farmed Pacific oysters. Their flesh is less firm than the native oyster and many people prefer the flavour of the natives. "They are quite different," said Glover.
Overview Videos Gallery  The Yin Yang Island is a mysterious island that became an arena in the Mortal Kombat series.  Contents show]  History  This island is stuck between two realms, Earthrealm and Outworld.  Sailors have said they've seen an island in a bed of fog then it would vanish. They said that the trees there would become snakes then turn back into trees again. No one would believe them and often blamed the strange delusional tales about the island on the rum.  In Earthrealm  On the good part of Yin Yang Island while in Earthrealm, it shows a luxurious, modern cruise liner on a calm open ocean and clear blue skies bathed in beautiful sunlight. In the distance is a statue holding a flower pot, and tall palm trees in foreground, thus it gives a more peaceful, isolated feel. Also in the middle of the isle, between the trees is a gong with the Mortal Kombat dragon logo on it.  In Outworld  On the evil part of Yin Yang Island while in Outworld, it shows a nethership on an unsafe ocean, a pale full moon, raging thunderstorms and fierce lightnings in the distance with a skull faced statue holding a fire pot and trees turn into snakes in the foreground, thus it gives a more sinister, isolated feel. Also in the middle of the foreground, between the giant man-eating serpents with a rope tied to them is a gong-like object with a Mortal Kombat dragon logo on it. If knocked into the water with a strong attack, one will be eaten alive by fish, the Deathtrap for this stage.  Statues of Yin Yang Island  In three concept sketches (including the two Earthrealm/Outworld sketches), there are still two versions of the two old, Asian-typed statues found on the Yin Yang Island. The one statue on the left is is that of a calm, peaceful Buddhist holding a flower pot with healthy flowers in it. The other statue on the right is that of a skull faced, undead-looking priest holding a fire pot that emits a flame.
Nearly every decision in the latest wave of MLS soccer-specific stadiums comes with a premium on creating environments boasting intimacy. Not the touchy-feely, quiet type of intimacy, but the loud, raucous style that puts tens of thousands of fans as close to one another and as on top of the pitch as possible.  Orlando City Stadium gives us a real-time example of the trend, even as we're about to see soccer-specific designs opening next year for Minnesota United, D.C. United and Los Angeles Football Club that mimic the effort.  As MLS buildings grow in size, now expanding past the typical 18,000-seat designs of the past toward capacities of 25,000, the larger sizes come with a focus on creating an intense environment, says Bruce Miller, lead soccer architect for Populous, designers of the new venues in Orlando, St. Paul, Minnesota, and Washington, D.C.  "MLS is expanding right now while other sports are creating different seating types and shrinking capacity," Miller tells FourFourTwo. "Twenty-five thousand will drive demand and create a great atmosphere. It is really giving our owners pause in terms of what the capacity should be and what they should be planning for in the future."  Top 20 stadiums FourFourTwo's 20 best stadiums for soccer in the U.S.  And as 25,000 sits as a tipping point — buildings larger than 25,000 really require a second concourse to best serve the population with amenities — it has also creates amenity-rich designs that differ from MLS venues of yesteryear. No longer is bare-bones construction, such as the first soccer-specific venues we saw in 1999 into the mid-2000s, the order of the day. MLS owners can now afford more.  The most architecturally pleasing and atmosphere-creating element of what we're seeing in current soccer-specific design, and what we will continue to see moving forward, is the canopy, a feature rarely added to the cost of early MLS projects.  It's not just a roof that shields the weather from the fans. A canopy gives venues a European-style design that also serves to reflect crowd noise back toward the pitch. To coincide, Miller says there are more seats between aisles in soccer venues — less in-game vendors allows this — and a tight continuous bowl around the pitch serves to "intensify the experience."  "It is about 90 minutes front to back and really creating a stage for people to experience the game in that period of time," Miller said. "The seating bowl has got a really intimate feel to it."  Troy Taormina-USA TODAY Sports  Jonathan Emmett, design principal for Gensler Sports, architects of the upcoming Banc of California Stadium for LAFC, echoes the "intense, yet intimate" words.  "The first generation of U.S. venues lacked these qualities, which tend to be trademarks of traditional British and European venues," he says. "Steep rakes of seating, tight field and sideline dimensions, roof canopies are signature elements of the LAFC stadium and these attributes will become the benchmark within MLS."  In Orlando, for example, the crowd presses to just 15 feet from the pitch. Paired with a tight bowl design, soccer venues have moved communal areas to the corner terraces, allowing for the bowls to focus on one thing alone: the pitch. In L.A., the 34-degree rake in the seating bowl will become the steepest in the MLS — expect that number to get matched across the 2018 venues — and only 12 feet will separate the field from the closest seat in the house.  As seating bowls grow tighter, steeper and closer, the next classic soccer design that will take over MLS stadiums comes in the form of safe standing, something we saw for the first time when Orlando City Stadium offered us 3,800 safe-standing seats.  "Those supporters' sections really drive the energy of the building," Miller says. "In the NFL and NBA, it is the sound systems and scoreboards, but in soccer it is really the crowd that drives the energy with chanting and singing. Those standing areas have become really popular."  Orlando introduces us to safe standing in North America (not counting Avaya Stadium's small at-grade standing section mixed in with its north-end bar), but Minnesota won't be far behind, with 2,800 safe-standing seats and a steeper rake than Orlando.  To keep them safe, the depth of each row remains similar to if it had a seat. A rail — with a cup holder — separates each row to eliminate the possibility of crushing people or the domino effect. "It is a very steep section so fans are right on top of the action," says Miller, who watched the 30 for 30 documentary on the Hillsborough disaster a dozen times.  These sections include drummer platforms, pul
Hillary Clinton Hillary Diane Rodham ClintonSenate panel subpoenas Roger Stone associate for Russia probe Webb: The new mob: Anti-American Dems Clinton to hold fundraiser for Menendez in NJ next month MORE is calling for Democrats to sanction another presidential debate next week before the New Hampshire primary.  The New Hampshire Union Leader and MSNBC announced Tuesday they would host a debate next week, but the Democatic National Committee said the party would not sanction it. Democrats are prohibited by the DNC from taking part in unsantioned events.  Clinton called on the DNC to reverse course to allow everyone to participate.  "What I've said to my campaign is that I would look forward to another debate. I am, you know, anxious, if we can get something set up, to be able to be there. And so let's try to make it happen," the front-runner for the party nod said during an excerpt of an interview on MSNBC's "Hardball" that will air Wednesday night.
By Eljalill Tauschinsky  On July 6, Austria has gone to Court over EU funding for a nuclear power plant in Britain. According to the Austrian public media, Austria argues that nuclear power is a bad policy choice, inherently unsafe and not future-worthy. The case argued before the Court will likely be more about competition policy, and about whether the specific deal distorts the EU- market for electricity; however, it is worthwhile to look into the more fundamental aspects of this case.  With this I do not refer to the (dis)merits of nuclear energy, although I should not hide that I am personally not a fan of nuclear power plants, and more with Austria than with the UK on this one. Instead, I want to bring in the constitutional issues of EU law, namely the relationship between Euratom and EU law.  Apparently forgotten by many but the nerdiest EU law enthusiasts, Euratom lives the long (and quiet) life of those suspected dead already. While it is common knowledge that with the Lisbon Treaty, the EU succeeded the EC, it is not true that thereby the European Communities were done with. Instead, Euratom has, at least formally, preserved a life of its own until this day: It still is its own European Community. The situation raises many issues on the law of personality, the interplay between international law principles (on personality) and EU law as well as institutional practice (Euratom is part of DG energy – thus does not even have its own Commissioner). However, dealing with these issues might have to wait until I can summon the time to do them justice in a proper article.  In any case it is important to remember that Euratom was created to further the civil use of nuclear energy (See its Article 1), and to make the peaceful exploitation of the immense powers stored in the atomic nucleus possible. Thus, it is explicitly the purpose of Euratom to help the member states have nuclear power plants (at least if they want them).  So, how should the EU react to assertions that nuclear power is not actually a good things, and that the EU should not fund power plants?  It is important to note that the EU is not bound by the goals of Euratom – formally. Whereas the Treaty of Maastricht contained a formal link between the EU and the Communities, this link does not appear anywhere in the new EU Treaties. If we follow the logic created by the two simply being separate legal persons, the EU could indeed condemn the use of nuclear energy for all the reasons that the Austrian government cites and not bother that this might contradict the Euratom Treaty. However, this would be to disregard the historical basis of EU law, which linked the goals of the Communities closely with the goals of the EU (and a provision in the Euratom Treaties, that EU law must not contradict it: Article 106a (3) Euratom Treaty). Moreover, even though formally separate, the EU's personnel and institutions are not separate from that of Euratom – and even pieces of legislation can be adopted pursuant to both Treaties at the same time. It does not appear wise or realistic – even for a lawyer – to rely on the formal separation under these conditions.  It has been noted that leaving Euratom out of the reform efforts around the European Convention and later Lisbon was questionable, and that a real debate about Euratom's future is still to come. General knowledge has it that the drafter of the Convention wanted to avoid exactly that debate – and the bad publicity it might generate. However, it seems this is a debate that cannot eternally be avoided.  It will be interesting to read the Court case with the questions on Euratom – EU relations and Euratom's future in mind – once it comes out. Even though it will on its face probably not involve any of the issues of EU- Euratom relations, I cannot but suspect that the view on these underlying issues will inform how easy or hard justices will find it to put obstacles in the way of building the first nuclear power plant in Britain since two decades.  0 Google+ 0 Linkedin  Author : acelg
Craig Bryson will make his first start in the Sky Bet Championship since September and is one of three changes to the Derby County starting line-up for today's clash with Fulham, kick-off: 3pm.  The 30-year-old replaces Will Hughes in the midfield three to make his first start under Steve McClaren since the Rams' manager returned to the club in the middle of October.The man he replaces, Hughes, drops to the substitutes bench for a league game for the first time since August.McClaren has also made two further changes to his attacking trio for today's trip to Craven Cottage.Johnny Russell, who was an unused substitute in the midweek 1-0 win over Queens Park Rangers, returns, whilst Matěj Vydra also comes in from the start to lead the Derby attack.They replace Andreas Weimann and Darren Bent respectively, who, like Hughes, are named on the substitutes bench in SW6.Today's fixture will see Bradley Johnson make his 50th appearance in Derby colours since joining from Norwich City in the summer of 2015.From back to front, and McClaren has named an unchanged back five for the fourth consecutive fixture.Scott Carson retains his 100 per cent record in goal and has a back line of Chris Baird, Richard Keogh, Alex Pearce and Marcus Olsson ahead of him.They will be looking to keep a sixth straight clean sheet in the Championship.Johnson continues to be deployed in the holding midfield role, whilst Jacob Butterfield and Bryson will partner each other in the middle of the park for the first time since the Rams' meeting with Burton Albion at the end of August.Tom Ince, who has bagged six goals in his last six games, is the only unchanged face at the spearhead of Derby's attack, as Russell takes up his position on the opposite flank and Vydra leads the line.McClaren, 55, will once again have a strong looking substitutes bench to call upon, should he need it, with Jonathan Mitchell, Jason Shackell, Darren Bent, Will Hughes, Abdoul Camara, Andreas Weimann and Jamie Hanson all in reserve.Button, Fredericks, Malone, McDonald, Cairney (C), Ayité, Johansen, Sigurdsson, Piazon, Aluko, KalasBettinelli, Odoi, Kebano, Parker, Smith, Madl, HumphrysCarson, Baird, Keogh (C), Pearce, Olsson; Johnson, Butterfield, Bryson; Ince, Russell, VydraMitchell, Shackell, Bent, Hughes Camara, Weimann, HansonTweets by @ dcfcofficial
Now that's one magical mystery tour.  Doctor Strange and The Beatles may seem like strange bedfellows, but there's actually a curious, fortuitous connection between them.  On Thursday, at the Hollywood premiere of the mystical superhero film based on the cult Marvel comic book, composer Michael Giacchino (you might know his music from The Incredibles and Ratatouille) chatted with PEOPLE about creating the score for it. That score, he says, was actually recorded at London's vaunted Abbey Road Studios — the legendary venue where The Beatles laid the tracks to their most iconic albums and singles.  There was, however, another magical twist: During one particular day, while recording the music to the Benedict Cumberbatch-headlined film, which opens Nov. 4, Giacchino discovered that there were two special visitors at the studio.  "When we got to Abbey Road one day, there were all these security guards around, and I'm like, 'What is going on here? What's happening?' " the tunesmith recalls. "And they said, 'Oh, Paul [McCartney] and Ringo [Starr] are in there doing PR for the Ron Howard film that they just put out."  That film was the well-received Beatles documentary Eight Days a Week. And, as it happens, Giacchino knew McCartney.  "I was like, 'Oh, that's great,' " he explains. "I had worked with Paul McCartney on a project, a little while back. So I just sent them a note. I said, 'Hey, I'm next door. If you have a chance, come by.' "  The legendary musician was happy to oblige.  "So, he came by, and the director, Scott Derrickson, is this huge, huge, huge Beatles fan. He couldn't believe it."  The visit turned out to be a prescient one: Giacchino happened to be working on a track that he says actually echoed The Beatles' distinct sound.  "Paul came in while we were recording this cue that sounded like it literally could have come off of one of their albums, that was recorded in that building, all those years ago," he says. "And Paul leans over, and he goes, 'This has got shades of 'Walrus' in it,' " — name-checking the band's trippy 1967 thumper "I Am the Walrus."  That moment, Giacchino muses, "will be forever one of my favorite things."  "He's obviously the best songwriter and musician we've ever known," the composer says, "and to have him be there, that was kind of cool."
Vacation was lovely, thank you for asking. And, how did I get welcomed home? By getting mugged, thankyouverymuch. At the grocery store, of all places. I'm fine. I wasn't hurt, but the guys who robbed me made off with my wallet, which not only had a wad o'cash in it, but also a drivers license with a kind of awesome photo from when I was really having a good hair and makeup day. Damn them. And, if I may risk sounding girly for just a moment, my wallet was really cute and took a long time to find, so I'm actually kinda pissed about that more than anything. Cancelling credit cards was easy, and luckily, I didn't have anything else of value in there. But I miss my wallet. Maybe Mike Bloomberg can buy me a new one, since he's decided not to run for President and thus will have some extra cash to spend on me. Maybe if you see this wallet in a store near you , you'll let me know. Isn't it adorable? Let's talk about this dish, because I've been looking forward to making it for a little while now. The only two times I've ever eaten rabbit were in fine dining establishments -- first, in 1992 at Le Cirque and later, in 1999 at Picasso in the Bellagio. I haven't ordered rabbit since then, although I've seen it on a few menus. And, I've never cooked it. When I started this project and was going through the list of dishes, I was excited to try rabbit. I'm not quite sure why, because it's never been one of those meats I've had a hankerin' for, nor have I ever yearned for the smell of rabbit cooking in my house. I think it's because I knew I liked it, but I didn't know why -- and if I made it myself, maybe I'd be able to figure it out. The day before I knew I wanted to serve this, I made the fennel oil. I blanched the fennel fronds and the parsley (separately), and ice bathed them. I drained and dried them off, and put half those green lovelies into my blender along with some canola oil. I turned the blender on medium, then high, and whacked them until they were smooth. I added the remaining parsley and fennel in small batches until everything was a blended, smooth purée. I put the purée into the refrigerator overnight. The next day, I florped it onto some cheesecloth, and rigged it onto my Kitchen Aid mixer so that the fennel oil would drop out into a bowl below. The French Laundry Cookbook suggests that you secure the cheesecloth over the top of a container, and spread the mixture on top and let the oil drip down. I've done it that way before , but had difficulty this time getting it to work, so I improvised. It tasted great, so yay for me. While the fennel oil dripped (for about an hour or so), I cooked the fennel. I trimmed off the top and root ends of the fennel bulbs, and cut a small "x" into the bottom of each. I put the fennel into a pot, covered the bulbs with cold water, and added some thyme, star anise, fennel seeds, a bay leaf, and some kosher salt. I brought the water to a boil, covered the pot, and let it simmer for 40 minutes. At that point, the fennel was nice and tender all the way to the core. I drained the fennel before putting it into a container and storing it in the refrigerator until I was ready to do the final steps before plating. Now, on to the main event. The rabbit. That package has four rabbit saddles in it, and I only needed three in this dish, so I've got an extra rabbit in my freezer, which I can't wait to experiment with in the next week or so. But enough about me. Let's talk about the bunnies. Oh, sorry. Does it bother you that I just referred to them as bunnies? Some of my friends were kind of grossed out when I told them I was making rabbit. It wasn't as bad a rejection as a certain celery dish , but no one was really all that thrilled to try rabbit. One of my younger tasters outright refused to try it, laughing in the face of my one-bite rule. I wonder if it had anything to do with me taking the package of meat out of the fridge the night before when they were visiting and making the package dance around the kitchen to "Here Comes Peter Cottontail." Perhaps I stepped over the line with that one. Perhaps. But I'm getting ahead of myself. Shocker, I know. BACK TO THE RABBIT AND
The same financial alchemy has been performed at Polaroid and US Airways, at textile companies like Cone Mills and WestPoint Stevens, and at a host of smaller companies over the last four years. And bankruptcy specialists say that it is almost certain to keep happening, because shedding pensions -- and pensioners' health care obligations -- is turning into an irresistible way to make a high-risk investment pay off.  "It's become a kind of system to bail out companies," Thomas Conway, vice president of the United Steel Workers of America, said of the pension corporation, which Congress created in 1974 to protect retirees if their employers went bust. "People have been able to use it tactically, as a business strategy, and I don't think that's what Congress meant."  Over the long term, the rate of defaults is clearly rising, said Lynn M. LoPucki, a professor of law at the University of California, Los Angeles, who has tracked the large companies that have shed their pension plans while in bankruptcy since 1980.  Less obvious is precisely how the trend will ultimately affect retirees, who sometimes have their pensions cut in the process. The cuts appear to be hitting more and more workers, but the government has not calculated how many since 1998.  Nor is it certain how the trend will affect taxpayers, who may wind up on the hook if the rising tide of failed pension obligations overwhelms the resources of the pension corporation. A year ago, when the agency last reported its balance sheet, it had $39 billion in assets and $62.3 billion in liabilities, leaving a shortfall of $23 billion. The Congressional Budget Office on Friday estimated that the deficit will widen to $86.7 billion by 2015 and $141.9 billion by 2025.  Mr. Ross, the investor who picked up the five dying steel companies, said he also thought that the current practice of sending failed pension plans to the federal guarantor "needs some reforming."  But, he added, the private sector was not to blame. "If we're going to continue defined-benefit pension plans at all," he said, "I really think we need to look at who enforces the rules, what the rules should be, and why there isn't a meaningful, risk-based system."  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In a risk-based pension insurance system, companies that run failure-prone pension funds would pay higher premiums than the companies that manage their pension plans more conservatively. But instead of charging more, the government has been waiving the pension rules, he said. "When you start giving people waivers," he said, "you're creating a time bomb."  Like defaulting on a loan, terminating a pension plan significantly lightens a company's balance sheet: the business instantly becomes more valuable because it does not have to use its cash flow to pay for past mistakes.  But defaulting on a loan affects the lender, who presumably vetted the borrower and charged interest commensurate with the risk. Defaulting on a pension, on the other hand, affects the pension corporation, which is required by law to accept a low premium unrelated to the risks it takes.  James A. Wooten, a pension-law historian who is a professor at the University at Buffalo Law School, said that Congress knew it was creating an imperfect system when it established the pension corporation in 1974, and that it expected to make improvements later. The bill was highly contentious, and Congressional leaders struggled mightily to achieve compromise in the last chaotic months of the Nixon presidency, with the Watergate scandal roaring around them.  In the beginning, they set pension insurance premiums at a token $1 per employee. Today, the basic premium is up to $19 a head, but Congress has found it hard to raise the rates even remotely enough to cover growing claims. Some companies have warned that if they have to pay more for their pension insurance, they will stop offering pensions.  "They took cautious steps, and those cautious steps weren't enough to prevent the abuse of the insurance program," Mr. Wooten said. "Once there's insurance, you have an incentive to run up liabilities to get more out of the insurance."  MR. MILLER'S arrival at Delphi in July, and the intense labor negotiations that have followed, are signals that the auto parts industry may be in for a long cycle of bankruptcies and restructurings, like those that reshaped steelmakers and are beginning to transform airlines.  "Something has to happen to all of these liabilities and cost structures," said Mr. Ross, who has said that he may invest in Delphi, the world's largest auto parts supplier, after those changes are made. "Delphi needs to sort out these complicated relationships before anybody will buy it. Something has to change."  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Delphi isn't the only troubled automotive company to catch Mr. Ross's eye. He has also expressed an interest
The strange and wonderful world of fanfiction has only one common creed, resounding across megafandoms and yuletide titles alike: I do what I want.  Critics like to point out that fanfiction communities lack the rigor and review of the editorial process; but leaving aside all the other problems with that observation, the ability to do what we want is one of fanfiction's greatest assets. We have no editors to please, no publishers to satisfy, and no markets to appeal to. We have the freedom to write absolutely anything and make it available to thousands of readers, to be truly radical and transformative, to tell stories that push boundaries and challenge assumptions.  So why do we keep writing the same goddamn stories over and over?  Representation and diversity are a hot-button topic in fandom. You'd be hard-pressed to find a fannish Tumblr that doesn't feature reblogs about feminist action, racebending, and queer history, but the themes of those blog posts are just as absent on the AO3 as they are in mainstream media. We give lip service to progress, then pour hours of work into supporting the same systems and ideas that make progress impossible.  Just like any big problem, I think a lot of what holds us back is not knowing where to start. As much as we want to write more inclusive stories, it feels lot like trying to clean someone else's basement. What is all this stuff? Where does it go? Is there a system? Will it eat me?  Writing diversity in fiction, even specifically fan fiction, is way too much to take on with one article, and I won't pretend to try. Instead, I'm going to focus on practice and practicality and propose seven questions you should ask yourself every time you sit down to write.  1. Ask yourself: What is normal?  From the moment our little baby brains realize that we aren't the only entities in the world, we get a whole mess of signals telling us how to think about certain things. Dark = sleep. Soft thing = toy. Big people = parents. This mental training goes on throughout our lives in different degrees with input from every possible angle, whether its family, friends, commercials, or random YouTube videos. We're trained to think that money = good, blue = boy, and cleaning = mom's job.  We're also trained to think that normal = straight, normal = white, normal = male, normal = cisgender, and normal = conventionally able. Don't believe me? Think about it this way: A class where you study books by white men in the US is called American Literature, right? So what do you call a class about books by white women in the US? What about books by Black people? Asian people? Queer people? Are you seeing the pattern?  Because the world around us has made every effort to whitewash our brains, we tend to gravitate toward characters who are, you guessed it, straight, white, cisgender, able-bodied men. This is the character at the center of the story that we're supposed to identify with and cheer for, not because we actually have anything in common with him, but because he is the "Everyman", the default, normal. Oh, and look, all his friends are also straight, white, cisgender, able-bodied men, except for his one non-white buddy, who is there to dispense ethnically humorous wisdom, and the solitary straight, white, cisgender, able-bodied woman who functions as the Sexy Lamp – I mean, Love Interest.  Our instincts tend to repeat this pattern in our own stories, often (since we're talking about fanfiction) replacing the only woman in the formula with whichever other white, cisgender, able-bodied male character we prefer. Our instincts are wrong. Our instincts, which have been finely honed by a lifetime of media consumption, tell us to erase or minimize identities that stray too far from "normal", and our instincts are therefore racist, misogynistic, homophobic, transphobic, and ableist.  Okay, now don't freak out! It's not your fault that your brain works this way. These are systemic problems that exist in our culture way beyond any one person's actions and feelings. Just because your instincts are awful and bigoted doesn't mean that you, personally, are an awful, bigoted person. Once you wrap your head around that, the really important thing is what you do next.  2. Ask yourself: What would make this more interesting?  What if one member of my OTP was transgender? What if one of them is biracial or white-passing? What if my character doesn't get important romantic advice from the other white guy, but instead goes to the Black character that they are also friends with? What if these random OCs that I wrote in as plot points aren't named John Smith and Mary Jones, but
CARSON, Calif. (Monday, October 29, 2012) – The LA Galaxy will begin their quest for a second consecutive MLS Cup title and fourth in club history on Thursday, November 1 when they host Vancouver Whitecaps FC in the inaugural Western Conference Knockout Round on Thursday, November 1 at The Home Depot Center. That game, which is presented by The Flame Broiler, will kick off at 7:30 p.m. and will be shown live nationally on the NBC Sports Network and Univision Deportes. GAMEDAY & FREE PARKING INFO  Thanks to an agreement between the Galaxy and California State University, Dominguez Hills, there is no hard cap on attendance for Thursday's game, though the club is currently only selling tickets in the stadium's lower bowl, which holds a capacity of 20,000 fans.  Additionally, the club and The Home Depot Center have made an agreement with the South Bay Pavilion to provide free parking and shuttles to the stadium. Shuttle buses from the Pavilion, which is located at 20700 Avalon Blvd. in Carson, to the stadium will run from 4:30 p.m. until approximately 11 p.m. Please click here for more information about offsite parking at the South Bay Pavilion.  The winner of that game will advance to face the San Jose Earthquakes in a two-leg, aggregate goal Western Conference Semifinal Series. PLAYOFF SCHEDULE  If the Galaxy, who are 2-0-1 against Vancouver this season and 4-0-1 against them all-time, defeat the Whitecaps in the Knockout Round, they will host the first leg of their Semifinal Series against the Earthquakes on Sunday, November 4 at The Home Depot Center. That game, which would also be presented by The Flame Broiler, would kick off at 6 p.m. and be shown live nationally on ESPN and ESPN Deportes. The second leg of that Western Conference Semifinal Series would be played at Buck Shaw Stadium on Wednesday, November 7 at 8 p.m. and would be shown live on ESPN2 and ESPN Deportes.  The winner of that series will advance to the Western Conference Championship against the winner of the series between Real Salt Lake and Seattle Sounders FC. If the Galaxy reach the Conference Championship for a fourth straight year, they would host the first leg at The Home Depot Center on Sunday, November 11 at 6 p.m. That game would be shown live on ESPN and ESPN Deportes with the second leg being played the following week on either Saturday, November 17 or Sunday, November 18.  The Western Conference Champion will face the Eastern Conference Champion in MLS Cup 2012 on Saturday, December 1. That game will be played at the home of the team that recorded more points during the regular season. The only way that the Galaxy could host MLS Cup 2012 at The Home Depot Center would be if they were to face the Houston Dynamo in a rematch of MLS Cup 2011. Of the five teams that qualified for the playoffs from the Eastern Conference, only the Dynamo recorded fewer points than the Galaxy during the regular season.  In addition to being broadcast live on NBC Sports Network and Univision Deportes, Thursday's game against the Whitecaps will also be available locally on the radio in Spanish on KWKW 1330 AM ESPN Deportes and online in English at lagalaxy.com. If the Galaxy advance to the Western Conference Semifinal Series against San Jose, both legs of that series would be available locally in Spanish on 1330 AM and 1220 AM KWKU as well as in English on KTLK 1150 AM.
High rollers at the big table. Only Sanders wants to break up the DC insider game ( source ; click to enlarge). by Gaius Publius An essay with a title like "The Democrats' 10-Point Plan to Lose in November" (the actual title is longer) is certainly provocative. Turns out it's an excellent analysis. I referred to it once in an earlier piece — " Media Support May Have Set Clinton Up to Fail " — and focused on just the media-related comments. But I want to give you the bones of the whole below and invite you to read it through. Are the Democrats setting themselves up for failure? I think so. Why would they do that? That's not explained in the essay, but as I've said many times, they'd rather lose to a Republican than lose to Sanders. The reason is obvious. Sanders is determined to take down the insider game they're all of them, Republicans and Democrats, playing — to their own mutual benefit and your inevitable decline . Protecting the game that enriches them all is job one, or it seems so, based on the behavior of the Democratic Party in this election. Now to that 10-point plan... The Democrats' 10-Point Plan to Lose in November The author is Seth Abramson, writing at Huffington Post. He starts: The Democrats Are Flawlessly Executing a 10-Point Plan to Lose the 2016 Presidential Election One needn't speculate about how the Democrats could end up losing the 2016 presidential election. In fact, a subtly complex, multi-part plan to do just that is exactly what the Democrats have been up to over the last six months. Here's a detailed report on the ten steps the Democrats are now taking to ensure they lose the White House to the Republicans in 2016: Now the points of that "plan" with some brief comments: 1. Assume that Donald Trump will be the Republicans' 2016 nominee, though it's now clear he won't be. After some discussion, Abramson writes: Trump has no chance whatsoever to secure the nomination at the Convention itself. Choose your reason: so-called "faithless" delegates; delegates who are free to choose whoever they wish after the first ballot; delegates "for Trump" who in fact were selected and seated by Cruz or Kasich; backroom Establishment machinations that sway delegates hoping to curry Party favor — all will conspire to deny the nomination to the man who Washington Post polling indicates would be, at the start of his campaign, one of the most unpopular political candidates in U.S. history. His own best guess as to who will be the nominee is here . 2. Nominate the only person who can reunite the Republican Party once Trump failing to get the nomination has fractured it beyond repair. Hillary Clinton is, in short, the only savior the Republican Party has left. So the Democrats are working as hard as they can to nominate her, of course. 3. Fracture the Democratic Party by broadly supporting the Clinton camp's attempts to smear Bernie Sanders and his supporters. I discussed this point with added notes here . 4. Fatally underestimate the electoral chances of the two men now most likely to be the Republican presidential nominee in November: Ted Cruz and John Kasich. Please note this if you think early head-to-head polling is inaccurate (my underscored emphasis): Clinton supporters say that general election polling isn't accurate in April. Unfortunately, we know from hard data that that's not correct. In fact, according to studies , we're right in the middle of a spike in general-election polling accuracy — right now, as in this minute. As Vox notes , "By the time we get to mid-April of an election year, polls explain about half the variance in the eventual vote split. And mid-April polls have correctly 'called' the winner in about two-thirds of the cases since 1952." 5. Fail to nominate their most popular candidate, in particular the one with the best chance of beating Ted Cruz or John Kasich in the fall. That would be Sanders, of course. 6. Freeze one of the most popular Democrats nationally, Bernie Sanders, out of the picture altogether. In 2008, when Hillary Clinton lost a hotly contested presidential nominating contest to Barack Obama, she was rewarded with the second-most powerful executive position in the U.S. government: Secretary of State. In 2016, the Clinton camp, determined to offend Sanders and his supporters, has leaked that if he continues to do well — winning about half the delegates in the primary season post-March 1st — they'll consider giving him a good speaking slot at the Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia.... Yes, you read that right. And there's more on that subject, Sanders' "reward," in the piece. 7. Reject Sanders' call for a fifty-state general-election campaign. If John Kasich is the Republican nominee, the entire Midwest — especially Ohio, Pennsylvania, Michigan, and Indiana — will be up for grabs in the fall. Given Clinton's weak standing relative to
About  Why not make my own QR code?  Regular QR codes are static and unchanging, normally pointing to a boring web page. On the other hand, MemoryTag codes allow you to dynamically create, change, or reply to videos on-the-fly (and so much more!)  How is Connect different than other social communities or file sharing services?  You don't live online. You live in the Real World. MemoryTag products conveniently play media messages from physical objects and places when you need or want them most. Whether you scan a code from a presentation, business card, or textbook, your access to media happens instantly without typing, searching, scrolling, or clicking.  I don't get it. What's the point of Groups in Connect?  No other service provides you with the ability to provide instant group invites upon scanning a code. No other service allows you to simultaneously share video messages, video replies, promotional offers, and notifications when someone scans your code. Sure, you can manage your interactions in the digital domain too--but imagine what you could accomplish by engaging people in the real world as well!  MemoryTag Connect is the advanced, feature-rich version of the MemoryTag app. If you haven't heard about MemoryTag, it's simply a new way to put videos on stuff. We've utilized QR technology in a way that makes it quick and easy to watch, create, change, or share custom videos by scanning a code with your phone.  Imagine being able to scan a greeting card to instantly see and hear a special message full of warmth and sincerity from a friend or loved one. That's what MemoryTag does right now. Our video cards, postcards, and stickers have stirred up tremendous excitement, and now we're ready to take things to the next level!  Whereas the current MemoryTag app is a straightforward, streamlined experience, we wanted to explore the possibility of applying the technology to specific areas of education, business, and community. The MemoryTag Connect will boast an impressive list of benefits that will allow users to truly flex their muscles when it comes to video sharing and collaboration.  Although MemoryTag codes are QR-based, the MemoryTag Connect app will be capable of scanning and interpreting just about any code, including books or that bottle of ketchup on the grocery aisle. Any QR reader can be utilized to scan a MemoryTag code and play the associated video, however you'll soon find that the MemoryTag Connect app is not only sexier than other QR readers--it's also better.  With MemoryTag Connect, users will be able to create any type of group. Whether you are interested in launching a massive marketing campaign, communicating with students and parents, managing the next family reunion, networking with employees and customers, or simply goofing off with friends, MemoryTag Connect gives you the power and flexibility to structure your organization exactly how you want.  Your videos are organized and accessible in a user-friendly library system that makes it easy to play what you need, when you need it. MemoryTag Connect makes video communication simple and effective. Your information, memories, messages, instructions, and experiences will be available at your fingertips anywhere at anytime!  We are improving social media sharing options and integrating a comments area that makes interacting with member videos a productive and fulfilling experience. Connecting with other people via multimedia has never been more enriching or exciting!  TIMELINE:  We are ready to steamroll through the next few months with passionate determination and professional efficiency. We have a solid foundation from which to build. We can't wait to bring MemoryTag Connect to the world!  GOALS:  Our initial goal of $25k will bring MemoryTag Connect to the world...But why stop there? Every Stretch Goal we unlock will unleash more Awesome upon the universe!  BACKER REWARDS:  The following items are just a few of the many cool rewards you can obtain by helping to make MemoryTag Connect a reality. The rewards are all compatible with current MemoryTag technology. And don't forget that every single Backer will gain Early App Access to the MemoryTag Connect's beta! You'll be using the app before the general public!  Want more than one reward? Contact us at rewards@thememorytag.com!
The largest asset manager in Dublin, Pioneer Investments, has suspended two senior executives in its Irish operation amid claims that both have been involved in efforts to set up another asset management company.  Sources said that the suspended individuals are Tanguy Le Saout, head of European fixed income, who oversees bond portfolio management as well as the company's European credit research, and Ali Chabaane, head of portfolio construction, covering equities, bonds and other assets.  The firm has moved two other senior executives, Cosimo Marasciulo, head of European government bonds, and global chief of staff for investments, Declan Murray, to cover their duties. The firm has told clients, as it informed them of the developments in recent days, that no regulatory or corporate breaches have occurred.  Efforts to contact the four men and a spokeswoman for Pioneer in Dublin were unsuccessful, while a spokesman for the asset manager in Boston declined to comment.  Exclusive talks  News of the suspensions comes in the same week as it emerged that Pioneer's parent, Italian bank Unicredit, has entered exclusive talks to sell the unit to French asset manager, Amundi, in a deal that is believed to value the business in the region of €3.5 billion.  A deal is part of efforts by the Italian group to overhaul itself and raise as much as €13 billion through asset sales and a share sale, according to reports.  The wider Italian banking system is struggling with €360 billion of bad loans. A move by Italian voters to reject a referendum on constitutional reform on Sunday, prompting prime minister Matteo Renzi to say he is resigning, is seen as hampering the efforts of the country's banks, particularly Monte dei Paschi di Siena, to raise capital.  Pioneer has housed its European investment base on George's Quay in Dublin since 1998. The unit, Pioneer Investment Management Ltd, had 473 employees at the end of last year, according to its most recent set of accounts filed with the Companies Registration Office.  The Dublin business reported an operating profit of €20.2 million last year.  Pioneer is Europe's sixth-largest asset gatherer with around €225 billion of assets under management.  Pioneer, bought by Unicredit in 2000, traces its origins back to one of the oldest US mutual funds, created in 1928 by Philip L Carret, a financial reporter at business weekly Barrons. Unicredit was involved in talks earlier this year to sell the firm to Spanish banking giant Santander. Those plans fell through in July.
We couldn't be more excited to announce that all of our paid plans on GitHub.com now include unlimited private repositories. GitHub will always be free for public and open source projects, but starting today there are just two ways to pay for GitHub.com:  Personal: $7/month  $7/month Organization: $9/user/month, $25/month for your first five users  One of the very best things about Git and other distributed version control systems is the ability to create a new repository without asking permission or getting approval. While this has always been true for our public plans, it hasn't been the case for individuals and teams working together in private. All that changes today.  If you're new to GitHub, you can sign up to start using unlimited private repositories. If you're already using GitHub.com, read on to learn how these changes will impact you.  Individual developers  If you're using GitHub for private projects, now there's just one paid plan—unlimited private repositories for $7/month. No matter what you were paying before, your plan now includes as many repositories as you need to work on projects in private—you can even invite collaborators.  Over the next few days, we will automatically move all paid accounts, from Micro to Large, to the new plan. If you're currently paying for one of those larger plans, look out for a prorated credit on your account.  Organizations  If you're currently paying for one of our organization plans, you'll have the option to upgrade to unlimited private repositories at any time. For many of you, this change will mean immediate freedom from repository limits and a better way to grow and pay for GitHub.  We want everyone to have a plan with unlimited private repositories, but don't worry—you are welcome to stay on your current plan while you evaluate the new cost structure and understand how to best manage your organization members and their private repository access. And while we're currently not enforcing a timeline to move, rest assured that you'll have at least 12 months notice before any mandated change to your plan.  A better way to work  We've heard from developers across our community that this new model is a better way to work. We agree—through years of building our business and developing GitHub for you, we've seen first hand the advantages of working without private repository limits. We hope you'll create more repositories, write more code, and keep doing amazing things with GitHub.  As always, we're here to help. Take a look at our new plans, learn how to update your personal or organization plan, or get in touch—we'd love to hear from you.  Frequently asked questions  For a paid organization on GitHub.com what kind of users will be charged?  You must purchase a seat for each user in your GitHub.com organization. These users fill a seat:  Organization members and owners  Pending invitations  Outside collaborators with access to 1 or more private repositories  These users do not fill a seat:  Outside collaborators with access to only public repositories  Billing managers  Will GitHub force me to move to per-user pricing after 12 months?  No. At this time we are not enforcing a timeline to move and if in the future we do decide to set a timeline we are committing to giving you at least 12 months.  I am an existing organization customer and prefer the per-repository plans. Can I remain on my current plan?  Yes, you can choose to continue paying based on the number of repositories you use. You can also upgrade or downgrade in the legacy repository structure based on the number of repositories you need.  Can there be collaborators on private repositories for the personal plan?  Yes. A paid personal account allows you to invite collaborators directly to your private repositories. If you need more granular permissions beyond full access, an organization plan is recommended.
What did I do? I made a bloody strawberry cheesecake :P and I regret none of it! This here is ffing delicious. Chewy, satisfying base and creamy, strawberry-y filling. MMMMM. When I was making the base I was struggling not to eat it all... when I made the filling I was struggling too. And when I made the sauce I just gave in and was eating it off the spoon. The cheesecake I made wasn't very big because I was lacking in the main ingredient- cashew nuts. The recipe below is for what I made but feel free to double or triple it ;) Handful of other nuts (I used a mixture of walnuts and pecans) Cheesecake: Two handfuls of soaked, plain cashews Method: Blend together the crust ingredients until nice and sticky but not smooth. I thoroughly recommend NOT using a hand blender for this, if possible. I used one because that's all I have and everything kept flying out and whacking my eyes and I had to stop every minute to unclog the blade. But it worked, I'm just saying, if you have a choice, don't use one. Press the mixture into the bottom of a cake tin, nice and flat. I used a round tupperwear box with foil in it because I didn't have a cake tin... haha. The one rule of cooking- be inventive! Now you can prepare the yummy filling. In the microwave, cook the margarine and stevia together for one minute. Put the cashews in the blender, pour over the melted marg/ stevia and blend. Blend till it's soooo smooth! And in the vanilla and salt to taste. I found that the vanilla really makes this taste amazinggg so don't skip it! Now stir in the chopped strawberries, you could possibly blend a few in but I would worry that it would make the mixture too liquidy and it wouldn't set. Now pour into the tin and level out! You can halve some strawberries and place them on top to decorate, if you like. The cheesecake now needs to go in the fridge to set for a good few hours, or overnight even. When it has firmed up nicely, make the strawberry sauce. It's very simple, just blend up the stalkless strawberries with a little stevia and some lemon juice. It's sooo good ;) Now pour over the cheesecake and ENJOY! UPDATE: I ate like a quarter of this (sounds a lot but it's quite small :P) and like 2 hours later I'm still full and satisfied! It was delicious and with a normal sugary/ dairy cheesecake I would have wanted to eat the lot... shows what wonders natural fruits and nuts can do :) UPDATE 2: Here is the last piece  (don't worry i gave lot's away :P)  with grated chocolate on top  with some reaaally nice aniseed/ fennel tea :)
Description of the 9.8 mode - Each battle takes 10 minutes; - 15 vs 15 format; - You can enter the battle only using event vehicles; - After destroying a vehicle in battle, it can be revived unlimited number of times in the spawn are of your team, after which the players are given the option to select a different vehicle from their garage; - There are flags located on the event maps, the players have to collect them by driving over them and then carry them in their base; - The goal is to accumulate a certain number of victory points until the time runs out (150 points to be specific); - Points are awarded for the following: enemy tank kill - 1 point, capturing a flag - 5 points; - Battle ends either by one team getting enough points or by the time running out. There are 6 flags on the map (neutral for both teams) that have to be captured and then carried to the release area. After that, a flag will respawn after some time. If the flag carrier is killed, the flag is dropped and someone else can pick it up. If it stays on the ground for a while, it will despawn and return to the starting position.
Since it started 11 years ago, The Huffington Post has been synonymous with the personality and the interests of its co-founder, Arianna Huffington.  The pioneering web publication, known for its aggressive use of aggregation and an unapologetically liberal worldview, would go on to win a Pulitzer Prize and expand globally during a challenging time for all media organizations.  But over the last year, The Huffington Post has found itself an increasingly small part of an increasingly large media and tech conglomerate. When Verizon, which announced it had purchased The Huffington Post's parent company, AOL, in May 2015, bought Yahoo's internet business last month, Ms. Huffington's perch at the company seemed increasingly precarious.  With her abrupt announcement on Thursday that she was stepping down as editor in chief of The Huffington Post and leaving the company to focus on her new venture, a health and wellness start-up called Thrive Global, she leaves the publication in an unfamiliar position. For the first time since its founding in 2005, The Huffington Post will be without Ms. Huffington. No successor was named.
"The people of Mosul will receive their salaries, while the people of Basra will receive the bodies of their martyrs," runs a bitter comment on Iraqi social media. Many Iraqis see the inhabitants of Mosul as willing collaborators with Isis during its three years in power in the city. In particular, there are calls for the punishment of "Daesh [Isis] families" whose male members had become Isis fighters or officials.  The desire for revenge runs deep among the victims of Isis in the wake of the fall of Mosul, which is scarcely surprising given the cruelty and violence of Isis rule. "I can always tell members of Daesh families when they ask for medical treatment," said a volunteer medical worker in west Mosul. "They have plump faces and look well-fed, while everybody else in Mosul is thin and malnourished."  Grounds for suspicion that a person was associated with Isis may be flimsy, but they are deeply held. "When women and children appear without any male relatives with them, it is assumed that the men were with Isis and have been killed, arrested or have fled," says Belkis Wille, the senior researcher in Iraq for Human Rights Watch. "They may say that the men were killed in the bombing, but nobody knows what the truth is." Young men from Mosul and Nineveh province, of which it is the capital, find it difficult to persuade the victorious Iraqi security forces that they spent years under Isis without doing some form of military service.  Revenge killings of suspected Isis activists and collaborators are still limited in number away from the battlefield, where few prisoners are taken. There have been some abductions and killings in the Sunni Arab villages south of Mosul, but no mass killings along the lines frequently carried out by Isis in Iraq and Syria. As many as 1,700 air force cadets, singled out because they were Shia, were massacred by Isis in June 2014, leading to the execution of 36 convicted perpetrators by the Iraqi government last year.  Yazidis who once lived to the west of Mosul, and Christians, are convinced that their Sunni Arab neighbours, with whom they had previously lived peacefully, were complicit with Isis in murdering, raping and stealing. They say they cannot return to their villages and towns if Isis collaborators are allowed to live there. In addition, the Shia-dominated Iraqi government and the Kurdish authorities have an interest in rounding off or expanding the territory occupied by their communities at the expense of the Sunni Arabs whose fortunes, willingly or unwillingly, have become linked to Isis and the foundering Caliphate.  ORDER IT NOW  Communal punishment in the shape of the forced expulsion of "Daesh families", which may mean sanctions against whole villages, is taking place in different parts of northern and central Iraq. Ms Wille says that at the Internally Displaced Person (IDP) camps in Khazar and Hassan Shami in Kurdish controlled territory east of Mosul, Sunni Arabs in the camps can "see their former villages, but are not being allowed to return there. On the other hand, they are being told that they are free to take the bus to east Mosul any time they want to go."  She adds that Sunni Arab tribal authorities are often taking the lead in expelling Isis families from their villages and sending them to IDP camps because they want revenge, saying they cannot protect them, or see them as tainted. She believes that a further motive is that "the Sunni community wants to show Baghdad and the world that they are not all Isis."  Sectarian and ethnic cleansing by state authorities or militia groups in Iraq may have long term political objectives, but they also fulfil popular wishes. For instance, in the aftermath of the recapture of Mosul earlier this week, two hashtags in Arabic went viral on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram. The first one was a variant of either "Mosul is ours" or "Mosul is ours and we took it". The second hashtag read "People of Mosul Deserve", accompanied by photos of the destruction in Mosul. There are hundreds of social media accounts evidently from Iraqi Shias, accusing the people of Mosul of supporting Isis. One post has two photographs, one showing people celebrating in the streets as Isis seizes Mosul in 2014 and similar scenes of celebration when the Iraqi armed forces retook it this month. The writer comments: "This is ridiculous."  Since the US invasion of 2003 Iraq has witnessed politically significant demographic change. The Shia-Sunni sectarian war in and around Baghdad in 2006-7 saw the Sunni compressed into smaller enclaves and mixed areas become wholly Shia. Since the counter-offensive against Isis began in 2014, Sunni Arabs have been forced to leave villages and towns in strategic areas south of Baghdad and in northern Hilla province. They are unlikely to be allowed to return because they could attack the roads between the capital and the Shia holy cities of Najaf and Kerbala.  The Sunni Arab community of Iraq, some six million strong, has suffered badly with all its main
Police re-capture government building in Donetsk  Police re-captured the administrative headquarters of the eastern Ukrainian city of Donetsk and have around 68 pro-Russian protesters in custody who are being questioned over the occupation.
Long-serving dark humour webcomic Cyanide and Happiness is releasing its very first video game, successfully crowdfunded on Kickstarter.  Straightforwardly dubbed The Cyanide and Happiness Adventure Game, the project is set for release in December 2018 — the first chapter, at least.  The crew, better known online as Explosm, was started online by Kris Wilson, Dave McElfatrick, Rob DenBleyker and Matt Melvin. It's been publishing its particular brand of dark, stick figure-led humour for over ten years now, with their bread-and-butter webcomics generating 12 million Facebook followers and video series accumulating 7.5 million YouTube subscribers — and even an NBC deal.  At the time of writing, the team have raised $377,287 of their $300,000 game goal with the help of 10,158 backers, with 20 days to go. Each copy of the game will cost $29.99.  In the traditional point-and-click adventure game you'll play as a group of high school students that live in the Cyanide and Happiness universe. And y'know, the apocalypse happens.  Here's a sneak peek:  The team have created new characters for the game, and you'll be able to collect customisable costume elements for your own character. There'll also be side quests aplenty, they say.  The game has been created by Roger Barr of Skeleton Crew Studios and I-Mockery, along with his game development partner Jacob West. Barr has irreverent, parody games like Abobo's Big Adventure under his belt, and his game Grave Chase will be out on Steam at Halloween.  "[Kris Wilson and I] grew up on a lot of adventure games like the old Sierra classics such as King's Quest, Space Quest, Police Quest, plus LucasArts classics like The Secret of Monkey Island or any of the Indiana Jones classic adventure games," says Barr in the Kickstarter pitch video.  Wilson adds that the game takes cues from games like 2014's South Park: The Stick of Truth.  Cyanide and Happiness has already successfully run multiple Kickstarter campaigns. Their first crowdfunded venture was 2016 card game Joking Hazard, in which players have compete to finish an awful, awful comic strip. (Seriously, do not play this with people you've just met.)  The game raised a casual $3,246,588 of a $10,000 goal.  With those numbers in mind, Wilson makes a strong point in the pitch video. "[A] big inspiration we had for making the video game is to show our parents that making a bunch of stick figure cartoons for the internet isn't a bad career choice, Dad."
The pair allegedly had sex at Miamisburg Middle School in Ohio. Picture: Google Streetview  The pair allegedly had sex at Miamisburg Middle School in Ohio. Picture: Google Streetview  A FEMALE teacher has been accused of engaging in oral sex and intercourse with a 14-year-old male student - allegedly inside the school.  Jessica Langford, 32, has pleaded not guilty to three counts of sexual battery and three counts of unlawful sexual conduct with a minor at the Ohio middle school, according to court records viewed by the Dayton Daily News.  Langford made her pleas on November 21, but additional information about her case recently came to light in response to a defence request for more specific accusations.  Jessica Langford allegedly had sex with a 14-year-old student at the school where she taught. Picture: Montgomery County Jail  The maths teacher, who had worked at Miamisburg Middle School for nine years, allegedly performed oral sex on, received oral sex from and engaged in intercourse with the teen student twice. The sex acts reportedly occurred May 23 at the school, Cleveland.com reported.  The student allegedly told another teacher about the sexual encounters with Langford, and that teacher then told administrators.  "We did our own little, quick investigation at that point," said Miamisburg Superintendent Dr David Vail, adding that, after Langford was placed on administrative leave, she chose to resign. "Because of that fact, we were mandated to report it to the Ohio Department of Education."  Langford was the second teacher to be busted for alleged sex with a student in the Miami Valley area during a two-week span in November.  Madeline Marx, a 23-year-old substitute teacher who worked at another school, was accused of trysts with two students and arrested earlier in November.  Meanwhile, a high school teacher in Oklahoma was fired Thursday after she and her 16-year-old student allegedly applied for a marriage license, the New York Post reported.  "You'd certainly think … someone would say 'I shouldn't do that,' but it doesn't occur to them," said Spt Vail.  This article originally appeared on Fox News and is republished here with permission.
Announcement Welcome to Loretta's Beads. We have a large selection of Charms, Beads and Jewelry Findings.   Please note that we combine shipping on all orders, and have flat rate shipping for US Customers.   Custom Laser Engraved charm production time is 12 to 14 business days, because each charm is made to order.  If you would like the backside of your charm engraved, here is the link to add it;   https://www.etsy.com/listing/497303596/double-sided-or-back-side-engraving-add?ga_search_query=backside+engraving&ref=shop_items_search_1   ******All Sales Final on Custom Laser Engraved Charms*******   Custom Laser Engraved Charms are processed in the order received. Express and Priority Shipping does not affect the speed in which the order is processed.
Signup to receive a daily roundup of the top LGBT+ news stories from around the world  A DUP politician in Northern Ireland has unveiled plans to introduce a 'conscience clause' – which would allow religious people to ignore equality laws and discriminate against gays.  Asher's Baking Company made headlines this year when it refused the request of a gay rights activist for a cake showing the message 'Support Gay Marriage', above an image of Sesame Street's Bert and Ernie.  The Equality Commission has since stated that this act broke anti-discrimination laws – but the bakery says it will make a stand for its 'Christian' principles.  Today, MLA Paul Givan has pledged to introduce a private member's bill which would effectively void parts of equality laws – by allowing religious people freedom to discriminate against gays based on their 'conscience'.  He said: "This clause will enhance equality legislation.  "Equality is about ensuring that everybody in society is allowed to live out their lives.  "We now are heading towards a community where it's not just about live and let live – people are now saying, 'you need to affirm my particular lifestyle and if that goes against your conscience, you have to do that'.  "That's not equality; that's intolerance."  He has the backing of First Minister Peter Robinson, who told delegates at the DUP conference: "I have become increasingly alarmed at the uneven pitch upon which rights and equality issues are played out. More and more the balance is tipped against people of faith.  "This has been recently demonstrated by the treatment meted out to the Ashers Baking Company.  "I believe in freedom of conscience. There will often be competing rights and freedoms but, nobody should be compelled or coerced into supporting, sanctioning or promoting views or opinions which conflict with their strongly held religious convictions."  "The publicly-funded Equality Commission has launched an unjustified attack on a small Christian family business. This is simply bullying.  "I contend that the Equality Commission is seeking to use the Ashers case to add a further layer of restrictions on Christian behaviour and practice.  In an unprecedented move, Mr Robinson also called for DUP members to come forward to contribute to the bakery's legal costs.  Mr Givan is expected to shortly introduce a consultation on introducing a 'conscience clause' provision.  Northern Ireland already lags far behind the rest of the UK on equality measures – banning same-sex marriage and refusing to lift the lifetime ban on gay men giving blood.
http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/Polyamory  Polyamory can lead to drama in bed.  — Dr. Laura Berman and Dr. Jennifer Berman, For Women Only: A Revolutionary Guide to Reclaiming Your Sex Life "Open relationships are not nearly as socially accepted as they were in the 1960s and 1970s, at the peak of the sexual revolution. But they do work for some couples, provided there's a tremendous amount of trust and commitment."  Rather than requiring someone to pick one person out of several potential love interests, or have a Your Cheating Heart situation, all parties involved agree to be together and share cooperatively. This typically lacks any drama of the decision itself, but has a different form of drama in how people make arrangements with each other, manage jealousy and households, and deal with the disapproval of society as a whole.  Individuals who identify as polyamorous may consider themselves "Ethical Sluts". Not all ethical sluts are polyamorous, and not all people in polyamorous relationships have the "ethical slut" attitude. The difference between a polyamorist and a swinger is that a polyamorous person has broad-spectrum involvement in their partners' lives, including love. Swingers are largely there for the sex, often for the novelty of an unfamiliar partner.  Subtropes:  Exotic Extended Marriage, when polyamory/non-monogamy is normal, if not the norm, for a foreign/nonhuman culture rather than a fringe practice.  Marry Them All, when a Love Triangle or Love Dodecahedron is resolved by coming to this conclusion.  If it's just hinted at, it's Threesome Subtext. If it's not canon but fans ship it, see One True Threesome. If it's just sex, not full-on relationships, see Three-Way Sex. If one partner receives preferential treatment over the others, then the former is Top Wife and the latter are a Supporting Harem.note Not every case of Supporting Harem qualifies, though; it must involve a Marry Them All resolution.  Not to be confused with Polyarmory. Polygamy is a subtype of polyamory, as it means more than one spouse, while with polyamory, marriage and dating both count. Though real life polyamorists try to disassociate these two as the word "polygamy" has some… messy implications.  For more details and some Real Life tidbits, visit Useful Notes On Polyamory. Truth in Television, obviously, though how culturally accepted it is varies wildly depending on the place, time period, and social standing. Currently, polygamy is Banned in China (plus all Western countries) but still legal in some parts of Africa and Asia.  Examples:  open/close all folders  Anime & Manga  Comic Books  Fan Works  Films — Live-Action  Literature  Live-Action TV  Music  Theater  The Noël Coward play Design for Living explores every possible combination of playwright Leo, artist Otto, and decorator Gilda before finally having them inform her husband Ernest that his services are no longer required, as the three of them intend to live in what Ernest decries as a "disgusting three-sided erotic hodgepodge."  In Gilbert and Sullivan's Trial by Jury, someone proposes that the defendant (in a Breach of Promise of Marriage suit) "marry this lady today, and marry the other tomorrow". That's considered a satisfactory solution until one of the attorneys points out to the judge that such an arrangement would be illegal.  Video Games  Visual Novels  Cross Days: You can do this in another very hard to get ending with Makoto, Yuuki, and Kotonoha. Makoto describes it as Kotonoha being the girl he loves most and Yuuki being the boy he loves most. Except Kotonoha doesn't know the all important details. She is seemingly okay knowing she is not Makoto's only lover, happy enough knowing she is girl he loves most, but she wasn't told that "other woman" is actually a boy, and that Makoto loves him equally to her, in a perfect example of From a Certain Point of View . And if she ever found out she could possibly murder Yuuki with some form of deadly weapon as she does in other ending where she overhears them having sex, and while Makoto is planning on trying to get her some mental help, this is the best solution he can come up with in the meantime.  Fate/stay night: In Unlimited Blade Works route relationship between Shirou, Rin and Saber is turning this way, with them with them slowly developing strong feeling for each other. And if a player is able to keep Shirou's affection for both girls in
Powered by imdb  Katherine Elizabeth Upton was born in St. Joseph, Michigan, to Shelley Fawn (Davis), a state tennis champion from Texas, and Jefferson Matthew Upton, a high school athletics director. Her uncle is Michigan congressman Fred Upton. Upton always knew she wanted to be a model. Since signing with IMG Models in 2010, Kate has taken the world by storm. For the past two years, Kate has graced the cover of the legendary Sports Illustrated Swimsuit issue, which has led to an onslaught of media buzz about the 21-year-old. Kate's stardom was elevated to an even higher level with her June 2013 American Vogue cover shot by Mario Testino, whose byline proclaims "American Dream Girl: How Kate Upton Became the Hottest Supermodel on Earth." She has appeared on Jimmy Kimmel, Late Night with Jimmy Fallon, The Ellen Show, The Late Show, Saturday Night Live, The Dan Patrick Show, and Le Grand Journal, and continues to be one of the most searched-for names on Google. Beyond Sports Illustrated, Kate has been featured on the covers of Vogue Italia, British Vogue, CR Fashion Book, Cosmopolitan, French ELLE, GQ, Italian GQ, German GQ, Jalouse, Sunday Times Style, Esquire, The Daily, and Muse Magazine. She has appeared in fashion editorials for American Vogue, Vogue Spain, V Magazine, Harper's Bazaar, and Russian Interview, and has worked with photographers such as Mario Testino, Steven Meisel, Terry Richardson, Alasdair McLellan, Bruce Weber, Sebastian Kim, Guy Aroch, Matt Jones, Miguel Reveriego, Norman Jean Roy, Josh Olins, Gilles Bensimon, Yu Tsai, Sebastian Faena, Walter Iooss, Ellen von Unwerth, and Stewart Shining. A favorite of high-fashion notables such as Stephen Gan, Tonne Goodman, Carlyne Cerf, Carine Roitfeld, and Katie Grand, Kate was also shot for the Metropolitan Museum of Art's "Schiaparelli and Prada: Impossible Conversations" Exhibition Catalogue in 2012. Models.com exclaims, "The sexy market just got a little more competitive thanks to the meteoric rise of Kate Upton. The Sports Illustrated swimsuit edition was a major coup, but the momentum keeps building with cover after cover. We can't remember the last time a newbie made such a splash!" Kate's YouTube video of her dancing to Cali Swag District's "Teach Me How to Dougie" last year was the number one watched video on Twitter and Google for multiple weeks. She has an enterprising reputation for creating viral hits, and the clip has over 8 million views. Known for her vivacious personality and incredible physique, Kate has been the face for Sam Edelman, Accessorize, Guess Lingerie, Guess Jeans, Guess Accessories, Liverpool, Dylan George, and Dooney & Burke. She has also worked with Gillette, Skullcandy Headphones and Beach Bunny Swimwear, even designing a Beach Bunny Swimwear collection herself. She has starred in commercials for Mercedes-Benz, Carl's Junior and Sobe, and starred in The Other Woman (2014), by director Nick Cassavetes. Kate resides in New York City. Kate is a five-time world champion equestrian, and she enjoys hanging out at the barn, horseback riding, and is an avid sportsfan. See full bio on IMDb »
"I generally try to reason out why I am stressed and work my way to eliminate the stressor," said MIT senior Abdullah Alsaeed.  The rate of student suicide at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology continues to be notably higher than the national average for college campuses, a painful and concerning statistic for leaders of the premier university who have for years tried to improve the school's suicide prevention, mental health, and counseling programs.  Over the past decade, the university's student suicide rate has been 10.2 per 100,000 students, according to a Globe review of public records as well as university and media reports. More recently MIT's suicide rate has been even higher; over the past five years the campus has reported 12.5 suicides per 100,000 students.  The increasing rate has been driven by the school's undergraduate population, whose suicide rate in the past decade has outpaced that of the school's graduate students — 12.6 to 8.5.  Advertisement  The national average for college campuses is roughly between 6.5 and 7.5 suicides per 100,000 students, according to three major studies that looked at undergraduate and graduate student suicides from 1980 to 2009.  Get Fast Forward in your inbox: Forget yesterday's news. Get what you need today in this early-morning email. Sign Up Thank you for signing up! Sign up for more newsletters here  At least one other local school, Harvard University, has an above average rate for its undergraduate population. The rate of suicide at Harvard was 11.8 per 100,000 undergraduates over the past decade. When accounting for both undergraduates and graduates, the rate at Harvard was 5.4 per 100,000.  In an interview with the Globe last week, MIT chancellor Cynthia Barnhart said that while the rate of suicides among MIT undergraduates is higher than the school's rate for graduate students and remains above the national average, the university's undergraduate rate has declined, particularly since the early 2000s. Between 1994 and 2005, the undergraduate suicide rate at MIT was 18.7 per 100,000.  Still, Barnhart acknowledged that the numbers are concerning and that the university monitors such data.  "We are numbers driven and we use the numbers to help us in thinking about how we can improve services and work with our students as effectively as possible," said Barnhart, an expert in using algorithms who uses a wall in her office to draw out complex mathematical equations.  Advertisement  "But the rate number is only one element, one metric we look at," she added.  The suicide rate nationally has increased among all ages in recent years. In 2013, the United States reported 13 suicides per 100,000 people, an increase from a rate of about 11 a decade earlier.  Among college-age people, the rate has increased from 11 per 100,000 a decade ago to 11.6 in 2013, according to data provided by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.  Bob Anderson, chief of the National Center for Health Statistics' mortality statistics branch, said researchers are trying to determine why the country's overall suicide rate has risen.  "There's nothing obvious there that would seem to explain it," he said, noting that possible factors such as the recent economic downturn don't seem to explain the rise.  Advertisement  But, he said, "The fact that it's steadily rising and hasn't turned down is worrisome."  Four MIT students — two undergraduates and two graduate students — have taken their own lives in the past year. Three of the students died this school year.  At the University of Pennsylvania, six students committed suicide between the fall of 2013 and the fall of 2014, according to media reports. And at Cornell, six students committed suicide during the 2009-2010 school year. The Jed Foundation, a nonprofit that works to promote emotional health and prevent suicide among college students, estimates that about 1,100 college students take their own lives each year, making suicide the second-leading cause of death among college students after accidents.  Student suicide rate at Massachusetts Institute of Technology Campus has rate above national average of 6.5 to 7.5 suicides per 100,000 college students 1995-2004 2005-present Suicide rate per 100,000 (all students) 10.90 10.17 Suicide rate per 100,000 (undergraduate) 18.66 12.63 Suicide rate per 100,000 (graduate) 5.71 8.52 Suicides (all students) 11 12 Suicides (undergraduate) 8 6 Suicides (graduate) 3 6 Enrollment (all students) 100,908 117,950 Enrollment (undergraduate) 42,874 47,488 Enrollment (graduate) 52,545 70,462 DATA : Office of the Chief Medical Examiner, court records, news reports, Globe reporting, MIT Matt Rocheleau/Globe Staff  The Globe this month reached out to more than three dozen other major colleges and universities around the country
The Speicherstadt is the world's largest warehouse complex located in the port of Hamburg, within the HafenCity quarter. A city in itself, the district extends over 26 hectares and comprises of 17 building complexes, each seven to eight stories high, with more than 300,000 square meters of storage area. For over a hundred years, these warehouses have held high-value goods such as coffee, tea, cocoa, spices, tobacco, and, in recent decades, oriental carpets. Small outbuildings, which are connected by roads, waterways and bridges, functioned as offices. The building's Neo-Gothic red-brick outer facade features richly ornamented brickwork, alcoves, and glazed terra cotta ornaments that bear witness to the city's economic prosperity. Since 1991, the unique district has been given historic monument protection. Just recently, it was awarded the status of UNESCO World Heritage Site.  Photo credit  Since 1815, Hamburg was a member of the German Confederation—the association of Central European states created by the Congress of Vienna—but not member of the German Customs Union. This changed with the establishment of the German Empire in 1871 and Hamburg became a member of the Customs Union. In order to keep the Hamburg port free, it was decided to create a customs free zone separate from the city where traders could ship and store goods without going through customs, and Speicherstadt was created.  The district was built between 1883 and 1927 in phases. The buildings of the warehouse stand on oak piles supports, and the quarter is criss-crossed by canals known as fleets, which allow boats and ships through by flooding at certain tide levels. This allowed the warehouses to be accessed both from the land side and from the water side. Travelling the narrow canals in small boats is one of the best ways to appreciate the architectural details.  Photo credit  Photo credit  Photo credit  Photo credit  Photo credit  Photo credit  Photo credit  Photo credit  Photo credit  Photo credit  Photo credit  Sources: Sys-con Media / Wikipedia / UNESCO / Hamburg-Travel
Users of the ASUS Transformer Prime may already be enjoying their hot-off-the-press upgrade to Ice Cream Sandwich, but when will its predecessor be so lucky? We've heard that it would be inbound sometime in February , but there's still a slight possibility that it'll get here even sooner. On its North American Facebook page, ASUS responded to a curious user, mentioning that it's in the process of getting Google's official stamp of approval. Once this is complete, ASUS will click the big red button and commence pushing Android 4.0 out to the tablet. So hang tight, folks, the wait's almost over.
Falling wedge patterns can be found in both uptrends and downtrends, but taking notice of the prevailing trend will help you determine whether the falling wedge signals a continuation pattern or a reversal pattern. In both cases, falling wedge patterns are generally resolved to the upside.  Context: Found within a downtrend, the falling wedge is often a reversal pattern. When found within the context of an uptrend, the falling wedge is similar to a bull pennant and is a continuation pattern. The example shown on this page is a falling wedge reversal pattern found at the end of a downtrend.  Appearance: The falling wedge pattern is a contracting trading range with a downward tilt. This may be seen by drawing two trend lines, a steeper trend line connecting minor highs, and a shallow trend line connecting minor lows. The early portion of the wedge has a wider price range, while the latter stages of a falling wedge are characterized by tighter price action. Volume expansion which accompanies a breakout from a falling wedge adds to the reliability of this chart pattern.  Breakout Expectation: In the case of a continuation falling wedge, the widest portion of the wedge may be measured and added to the breakout level to determine the upside move which follows. When a falling wedge is a reversal pattern, the widest portion of the wedge may be added to the breakout level to determine the upside move which follows.  This stock formed a falling wedge pattern during its downtrend which led to an upside reversal and a very reliable trading low. Once the upper trend line was broken to the upside, the stock moved higher with ease.  Falling wedge patterns are reliable signals we like to trade from, so we point them out to members of our stock pick service whenever they're found on the charts. Come trade with us!  Learn more about wedge patterns like the rising wedge pattern.
Story highlights Kim criticized terrapin farm during on the spot site visit  Angered that it had failed to breed lobsters ahead of major anniversary celebration  North Korea's leader publicly criticized the state weather service for incorrect forecasts in 2014  Hong Kong (CNN) It's usually top generals or potential rivals who feel the wrath of North Korea's leader, but this week Kim Jong Un's ire was directed at a terrapin farm.  According to North Korea's state-run KCNA news agency, the country's Supreme Leader recently carried out an inspection of the Taedonggang Terrapin Farm where he noted a number of "serious shortcomings."  For one thing the farm, which is located on the outskirts of Pyongyang, didn't pay enough attention to the study of his late father, who KCNA said was the inspiration behind the project to "provide the people with tasty and nutritious terrapin widely known as a precious tonic from olden times."  JUST WATCHED Kim Jong Un's iron fist causing backlash? Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Kim Jong Un's iron fist causing backlash? 02:30  "It is hard to understand that the farm visited by Kim Jong Il did not arrange even the room for education in revolutionary history," KCNA quoted Kim as saying. "The employees who failed to bear deep in their minds his leadership exploits could hardly perform their role as masters in production."  He then added, ominously, that the farm's atmosphere was completely different from others he visited.  Read More
Based on many years of interactions with young men who were in jail, on probation supervision or in treatment, we believe that "elsewhere" mostly rests at the intersection of Chicago youths' psychological vulnerability and the environments and circumstances that encourage the expression of violent tendencies. This conclusion stems from our varied careers and professional activities, which include regular contact with detainees in the Cook County Jail who are receiving behavioral health care services, as well as the directorship of a youth clinic that served the Near North Side and Cabrini-Green.  All of the young men we encountered have either experienced or witnessed violent acts or knew someone who had. For years, we have explored the psychological characteristics of youths who commit violent crimes in Chicago and other large cities—specifically, how their thoughts and feelings affect their behavior in the streets where they shoot and are shot at by young men very much like them. We have studied the psychology of their personal and interpersonal interactions. And we have analyzed the social conditions that have fostered violence in Chicago and contributed to such psychological dysfunction.  What we hope to arrive at are strategies for encouraging children to grow into healthy adults, thereby creating safer neighborhoods.  BRAIN DEVELOPMENT  All adolescents must master basic psychological and developmental tasks. The steps toward this mastery start at home and in primary school. Yet the highest proportions of incarcerated fathers hail from Chicago's most violent communities.  The young offenders we met were often raised in single-parent homes, loosely supervised and poorly parented. They were more likely than kids from more stable families and households to experience violent acts that can lead to childhood post-traumatic stress disorder. Adding to these children's neglect, they are products of a primary school system with few resources and overextended teachers. They enter the crime-prone years of adolescence with numerous challenges that set the stage for delinquency and early criminal pursuits.  Then, during adolescence, these at-risk youths move out from under the umbrella of their families and have even less parental oversight. This coincides with a time when the adolescent brain is naturally reorganizing, which​ can create its own brand of instability.  In a supportive household, parents help modulate this internal instability. In teens raised in stable homes, the brain forms critical new pathways and develops abstract thinking skills that enable adolescents to function effectively in complex situations and new contexts. They start mapping their future trajectories, and that helps guide their actions and decisions. When feeling impulses to engage in destructive behavior (e.g. truancy, vandalism, alcohol use), teens raised in stable households have a greater capacity to control their urges and actions because they can better visualize consequences and are more concerned about the approval of the adults in their lives.  But without the benefits of parental nurturing and early education, young people who have been neglected at home and school often develop intellectual and emotional disorders that limit their capacity to regulate their feelings. They don't foresee a viable future, and they aren't prepared for more demanding life situations as they enter adulthood.  We have observed that young adult offenders begin their adolescent years with a variety of deficits. Many can read or communicate only at rudimentary levels. Low verbal intelligence interferes with the formulation of plans, the interpretation of life experiences and the appreciation of consequences. What's more, primary school classes and teachers can't maintain an environment or access the resources to address the behaviors associated with childhood PTSD.  We also see that students who are either the most ill-prepared to learn or the least able to focus in the classroom attend school the least, falling further behind peers. High school exposes them to embarrassing and humiliating experiences. Their disorganized and dysfunctional families provide little encouragement for them to stay and learn. In response, they drop out. Not surprisingly, the neighborhoods with the highest numbers of shootings and homicides also have the highest rates of high school failures.  Without the cognitive and interpersonal skills that prepare them to respond proportionately to perceived disrespect, threats or harm, these emotionally underdeveloped young people can't explain their actions or even identify or articulate their thoughts or feelings. They respond to minor verbal attacks and perceived threats with eruptions of impulsive violence. They don't have the tools to meet the demands of urban social life. Restricted psychological functioning prompts them to use violence as their primary means of expressing and defining themselves. The gun becomes their instrument for protection, communication, dispute resolution—and esteem building.  BACK TO LA AND NYC  So what is different about these troubled Chicago youths compared with those in New York and LA? After all, young men in all three cities live under similar circumstances and hardships. But there are significant differences among the cities that appear at all levels: historical, political and economic.  Nearly 20 years ago, for example, the Los Angeles Police Department added 1,000 officers and shifted its focus from an arrest- heavy to a service-heavy style of enforcement. Police officers were rewarded for community outreach activities. No such sustained efforts have ever been implemented in Chicago, and the gulf between the
This post was edited on 6/24 at 9:11 pm  You guys are lucky because you don't have to decide between only three pant lengths (short, reg, long) but on the flip side you're impossible to buy for unless you know the exact right size.I'm thinking 32 inches should be about right in most cases?
Description We hand make these sausages ourselves and are sure you will love them. Our most popular version - Spicy! Now without sugar!!  We use cayenne pepper to give these sausages their kick. They're not painfully hot, but spicy enough to kick in the endorphins. You'll notice below we've gotten a comment from someone saying these are the "best sausages" they've ever eaten? We hear that a lot about these sausages.  This friend of mine, Jamie, a fat guy from Canada, he loves them, he also says they're the best sausages he's ever had. And he's fat so he knows a thing or two about good eatin'!  Serving Suggestion The best way is to simmer them in very hot water for a couple of minutes.  Do not boil them dead! Simmer then gently and then throw on the grill for a couple of minutes for the final finish.  In Depth Because size does make a difference! Our sausages are handmade and our biggest sausages weigh 150g each. The commonly available "sausage" in almost all Japanese supermarkets are nothing more than a small-bite snack. Our sausage packs contain 5 sausages (500g), some 7 (450g) or 9 (270g) sausages depending on the type. This sausage contains 3 sausages with a total weight of approx. 390g   Fresher than our sausages is impossible, unless you start stuffing living cows and pigs into casings. Our sausages are processed from the beginning. We take fresh (never frozen) meat, grind it, add natural fresh spices and stuff it into either pork or lamb casings, vacuum pack them and freeze them immediately. Our sausages are neither pre-cooked nor prepared in any way and we don't add any additives or artificial preservatives to any of our items we produce! Hence, you need to cook the sausages before eating - but that is very easy and absolutely worth it. Once you go fresh raw meat sausages you will never go back.   We don't add any additives or artificial preservatives to any of our items we produce! All the spices we add are 100% natural spices only and most spices are even ground at our processing plant just shortly before we produce our sausages which adds extra freshness. Because our sausages are additive-free they need to be cooked immediately once you thaw them. The only way to preserve our sausages up to a whole year is by keeping them frozen.  Thawing The thawing time depends on many factors such as size, weight, packaging and type of meat. Please refer to our thawing chart ≫here≪
Resources  Legislative Action Center  Guide to talking to your legislators  How a bill becomes a law in Iowa  ACTIVE Pro Second Amendment Bills  Hearing Protection Act  Legalizes suppressors in Iowa  Bill history:  1/15/16 – Introduced  1/26/16 – Passed a House of Representatives Judiciary subcommittee vote  2/4/16 – Passed a House Judiciary vote  2/23/16 – Passed House vote  3/1/16 – Passed a Senate Judiciary Subcommittee vote  3/2/16 – Passed a Senate Judiciary Committee vote  3/17/16 – Passed a Senate vote 46 to 4 with an amendment  3/22/16 – Passed a House concurrence vote 77 to 22  3/31/16 – SIGNED INTO LAW!   ATV Carry Act  Allows lawful Permit to Carry holders to carry while using off-road vehicles  Bill history:  1/20/16 – Introduced  1/28/16 – Passed a House of Representatives Natural Resources subcommittee vote  2/4/16 – Passed a House Natural Resources vote  2/23/16 – Passed House vote  3/10/16 – Passed a Senate Natural Resources subcommittee vote  3/10/16 – Passed a Senate Natural Resources committee vote  3/22/16 – Passed a Senate vote 43 to 4  3/23/16 – Passed a House concurrence vote 77 to 18  4/6/16 – SIGNED INTO LAW!  Inactive Bills  Hunter Protection Act KILLED BY SENATE INACTION  Allows hunters to carry a handgun for personal protection  Bill history:  1/19/16 – Introduced  Current location:  Senate Judiciary Subcommittee  Joe Bolkcom, Dick Deardon, Tom Shipley  joe.bolkcom@legis.iowa.gov; dick.dearden@legis.iowa.gov; tom.shipley@legis.iowa.gov  Emergency Protection Act KILLED BY SENATE INACTION  Guarantees Second Amendment rights are not suspended during a state of emergency  Bill history:  1/15/16 – Introduced  1/21/16 – Passed a House of Representatives Judiciary subcommittee vote  2/4/16 – Passed a House Judiciary vote  2/23/16 – Passed House vote  Current location:  Senate Judiciary Committee  Youth Safety & Parental Rights Act KILLED BY SENATE INACTION  Repeals Iowa's ban on supervised youth handgun training  Bill history:  1/15/16 – Introduced  1/25/16 – Passed a House of Representatives Judiciary subcommittee vote  2/4/16 – Passed a House Judiciary vote  2/23/16 – Passed House vote  Current location:  Senate Judiciary Committee  Privacy Protection Act KILLED BY SENATE INACTION  Bill history:  01/29/2016 – Introduced in the Iowa House of Representatives  2/4/16 – Passed a House Judiciary subcommittee vote  2/16/16 – Passed a House Judiciary committee vote  2/23/16 – Passed House vote  3/2/16 – Passed a Senate Judiciary subcommittee vote  3/10/16 – Passed a Senate Judiciary committee vote  Current location:  Full Senate  Iowa Firearms Coalition is an entirely volunteer, grassroots, Second Amendment advocacy group. Responsible for bringing uniformity to Iowa's Permit to Carry process, IFC's members work to protect and enhance Second Amendment rights in Iowa. An affiliate of the National Rifle Association, the IFC actively seeks to foster and promote the shooting sports. Sign up for our email list for the latest on Second Amendment issues in Iowa. You can support our work by becoming a member, or making a donation.
The CIA once implanted microphones in a cat as part of a bizarre Cold War plot to spy on the Soviets, reveal declassified documents.  The report details how 'pioneering' scientists surgically implanted a wire along the cat's spine, using its tail as an antenna, while a microphone was planted inside its ear canal.  A transmitter and power supply was sewn into the unlucky cat's chest.  View photos This grim illustration shows how spying equipment was surgically implanted in the cat (National Security Archive) More  Known as 'Project Acoustic Kitty', the inhumane research project ran from from 1962 until 1967 and was developed as a new way of spying on the Soviets.  The initiative came at a high price, not just to the cats, but also to the CIA purse – costing $13 million (£10 million).  The experiments are summarised in a 1967 report called "Views on Trained Cats [Redacted] for [Redacted] Use".  [graphiq id="e3QszYDw4mh" title="Poll: How Do You Feel About Government Surveillance?" width="600″ height="582″ url="https://w.graphiq.com/w/e3QszYDw4mh" link="https://www.graphiq.com" link_text="Visualization by Graphiq" ]  Unsurprisingly, robo-spy cats were never actually deployed in the field.  During a ill-fated test run in a park, the unfortunate feline was run over and killed by a car.  The concluding 1967 report confirmed that the cat-based bugging method was impractical.  However, it gave praise to the scientists who carried out the grim experiments.  READ MORE: Twitter could have predicted the outcome of the Brexit vote, claims study  READ MORE: NASA is running out of spacesuits – and the new ones are nowhere near ready yet  "The work done on this problem over the years reflects great credit on the personnel who guided it particularly [redacted] whose energy and imagination could be models for scientific pioneers," it says.  While the documents were first declassified in 2001, the macabre project was recently brought to light after Wikileaks tweeted a link to an archive of declassified reports.  Speaking at the time, former CIA officer Victor Marchetti told The Telegraph: "They slit the cat open, put batteries in him, wired him up. They made a monstrosity".
timeseal WHAT IS TIMESEAL?! Timeseal is a program that has been developed to improve chess on internet. Netlag often causes players to lose valuable seconds or even minutes on their chess clocks. Transmission time is counted against you, unless the chess server can tell exactly when information is transmitted. The timeseal program acts as a relay station and keeps track of transmission times. What timeseal does is record your thinking time, so that transmission time is not counted against you. Timeseal will not prevent netlag but it makes the games fairer when lag occurs. (For other ways to handle the impacts of lag, read "help lag".) HOW DO I USE TIMESEAL?! Some interfaces have timeseal built into them; examples are Fixation (finger Adum) and PowerICS (finger Kossy) for Macintosh systems, WinBoard versions 3.6.0 and higher (finger Mann) for Windows 95 and Windows NT, and CClient (finger Plotinus). To use these programs, make timeseal active before you logon to the chess server. Finger the program authors for up-to-date information on their interfaces. Other users must get a version of timeseal working on the computer that connects to the chess server. In most cases, you must run timeseal on the computer host that links you to the chess server. The version of timeseal you need will depend on the operating system used by your host computer. You will need to identify which version you need, download it and make it ready for use. Because computer operating systems differ, there are different versions of timeseal. For further details, see the separate help file for your operating system. There are separate files currently for Macintosh, Windows and Unix systems: help timeseal_mac help timeseal_os2 help timeseal_unix help timeseal_windows Others will be added as they become available. See Also: chan_1 ftp_hints interface lag [Written by Hawk, August 15, 1995; last modified: May 15, 1998 -- Friar]
An Iranian journalist who campaigned for President Hassan Rohani and who had traveled to Lausanne with Iranian negotiators to cover talks on Tehran's nuclear program is seeking political asylum in Switzerland.  Amir Hossein Motaqi, editor of Iran's ISKA news agency, told RFE/RL he decided to seek asylum after being hampered in his journalistic work by Iranian officials.  "Officials from the Foreign Ministry demanded that we cover the news they wanted -- news that was not true -- or not to cover news that they didn't want to be published," Motaqi told RFE/RL in a telephone interview from Lausanne.  He said pressure also came from "one or two" members of news agencies affiliated with the powerful Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps (IRGC).  Motaqi, 31, said such "clear interference" forced him to end his work with domestic media "to tell the truth and defend freedom of expression."  Press freedom advocates say journalists in Iran face tough official and informal censorship.  The French media watchdog Reporters Without Borders has said that Iran censors independent coverage of the nuclear issue, including the talks with global powers on Tehran's nuclear program and the costs of building nuclear facilities.  Motaqi declined to provide concrete examples about the limitations Iranian journalists covering the talks face. The negotiations are aimed at finding a lasting agreement that would curb Iran's nuclear activities in exchange of sanctions relief.  "It was more than some limitations, it was a clear interference," he said.  When asked whether officials had contacted him since he decided to seek refuge in Switzerland, Motaqi said, "I'd rather not talk very openly about this, to be honest I'm afraid."  Iranian media sought to distance themselves from Motaqi.  ISKA news said in a statement that "an individual who didn't have any role in the news agency" and who had traveled to Lausanne on personal expenses, had acted immorally and unprofessionally while there.  "After that ISKA news management fired the individual before the [Iranian] New Year [on March 21]," the statement said.  It added that ISKA news denies any ties with Motaqi.  The Iranian news site Entekhab said Motaqi was a "simple sports reporter" who had traveled to Lausanne with the sole purpose of fleeing Iran.  "News sources in Lausanne say that this individual had come on the trip with a plan, and that he had not performed any news duties since the day he started."   Motaqi said he believes Rohani and his team work hard to bring changes.  But he said the opposition against the government is so strong that its chances of success are, in his words, "close to zero."  Rohani has come under pressure by hard-line conservatives over his cultural and social policies that are deemed too liberal. Hard-liners who control key state institutions have also made it clear that despite the nuclear negotiations with the United States, they are against a détente with Washington.  Motaqi also said that the situation for Iranian journalists has not improved under Rohani who has promised greater press freedom and less state censorship.  "Some might say that [under Rohani] the number of newspapers that have been shut down and journalists who have lost their jobs has decreased. But in general conditions for journalists in our country deteriorate every day."  He said newspapers and other publications face censorship and editors have to comply with state guidelines.  Motaqi said he is working on a book about his experience campaigning for Rohani, which he said he is hoping to publish in Switzerland.  Following the disputed 2009 presidential vote and the state crackdown that followed, many journalists fled Iran to avoid arrest and prosecution.  Since Rohani's election in 2013, a few of them have returned to Iran. At least two have ended up in prison.  The Committee To Protect Journalists (CPJ) said in January that Rohani has not lived up to expectations that he would usher a new era for the Iranian press.  The New York-based CPJ said a new wave of arrests and prosecutions of journalists has been carried out by authorities.
...  (I'm petite, height-wise, at least)- doesn't show much even under tight-fitting tops- so far, I think all of the fashion colors are prettyCons:Now this will be somehow a long story. I've had tons of issues with Lucy, even though it is the best-fitting bra that I own.First, some things that I can't change about Lucy (only Panache can do that *not-so-subtle-HINT*)- The band is rather narrow and has only two sets of hooks and eyes. Curvy Kate makes nice bands with 3 sets of hooks and eyes and even though the fit of their bras is simply WRONG on me I can tell how much more comfortable wider bands are.- The wires are too wide. I have space left at both sides but since I bent the wires I don't think it affects the fit or the support of the bra.But now I will come to the main issues that I had with Lucy. These are my personal experiences and might not affect you at all.When I purchased the Lucy I deemed her pretty much the best fit I could get from a bra. The cups fit, no fourboob, no band riding up, no wires poking me in the armpits or the breastbone.After wearing it for a couple of times, though, the bra started chafing and rubbing and leaving angry red marks that itched like crazy. I never experienced such pain from wearing bras before. I only recently discovered the reasons for this thanks to Emily from dimpseybrafit.blogspot.co.uk, whom I feel truly grateful towards. Do check out her blog.- The wires are only lightly padded. This means if you don't have much on your ribcage to cushion you from the wires, they can very uncomfortable.I could resolve this issue mostly by bending the wires. That doesn't make them any more padded but at least they fit the shape of my body now. I first bent the wire to make it curve where my ribcage does, then I bent the ends of the wires so that they now face outwards a little.- The band is little too loose for my 27.5 inch ribcage. Which is why it started moving around on my back. It didn't ride up but it was loose enough to cause friction.I need to wear it starting on the second hook.And this may sound incredible but as soon as I ditched my extender (which I used to lessen the strain on my skin while still being able to wear a bra - didn't work) and tightened the bra, I felt better.My skin has recovered and I can wear Lucy all day, if necessary.It still isn't the comfort bra of my dreams but it has become one of my favorite bras and I wear her regularly.What I wanted to mention, too:I would buy another one when this one dies, maybe in white or another fashion color.(Only.... why does everything have to be purple in 2013?)I had a chance to try the black Lucy in 30HH once. The band was of course too loose and rode up but I experienced quadboob even though the cups should have the same volume as those of my 28J. Maybe the black ones run a little tighter in cups.UPDATE: My boobs grew a little, so I quadboobed out of Lucy. I used BrasIHate's center gore alteration to get a some more space. I took in the center gore only a tiny little bit, probably not even one cm, but that was enough. A little goes a long wayStill, this alteration changed the cup shape, and I would prefer being able to just order a 28JJ. I could try the 30J, but altering a band is much more complicated than just taking in the center gore. Cleo, why can't you just make bras up to a K cup? Sigh.
Here are your Puck Headlines: a glorious collection of news and views collected from the greatest blogosphere in sports and the few, the proud, the mainstream hockey media.  • Looking more and more like a marshmallow that fell on the ground with each passing day, Phil Kessel takes in an L.A. Clippers basketball game.  • Islanders fans are mad about everything, and this protest they're planning sounds like quite the operation. [Isles Nation]  • Jarmo Kekelainen on Blake Comeau's suspension: "It was a hard hit and they said he was tracking the target for a while. I heard their logic. As much as I want to support our players, we have to suffer the consequences." [Blue Jackets Xtra]  • And, speaking of the Jackets, they're forging a formidable identity at just the right time. [ESPN]  • The Blue Jackets/Stars makeup game may not be played until April 14th, two days after the season is supposed to end. [Aaron Portzline]  • Teammates of late OHLer Terry Trafford remember a prankster, and a player that always had their backs. [Yahoo]  • And in case that didn't make you sad enough, hear from Trafford's father, Roy, who is heart-broken. [Toronto Sun]  • The Canucks got Alex Burrows back, as the winger scored his first two goals of the season, but his curse moved immediately to Ryan Kesler, who could out for a long time after a knee-on-knee hit Wednesday night in Winnipeg. [CBC]  • In an effort to lighten the mood in Tampa Bay, the Lightning played strip shootout. Score or strip. These are your only two options. Poor Alex Killorn nearly got naked. [Tampa Bay Tribune]  • A hockey dad has been banned from his kid's minor-league games after putting a linesman in a headlock. Can't do that. [The Spec]  • Did Alex Ovechkin try to win himself in a charity raffle? It may seem preposterous, but recall that there's left-wing Alex Ovechkin and right-wing Alex Ovechkin, and they were once named to the same team. [RMNB]  • Mike Smith is playing his best hockey since the Coyotes won the conference title a few years back. [Fox Sports Arizona]  • Awesomeness: The Kings will be wearing the gold jersey, purple short combo next year for some special game nights. [LA Kings Insider]  • The Royal Half goes to Edmonton, and in so doing, provides the one thing the otherwise elite Edmonton blogosphere lacks: humour. [The Royal Half]  • The world's oldest hockey stick is for sale on eBay. [Puck Drunk Love]  • Fantasy showdown, or, arguably, dudes born during an early 90s' naming trend showdown: Brandon Saad vs. Jaden Schwartz. [Dobber Hockey]  • The New York Times delves into the world of university club hockey. [NY Times]  • Cory Conacher has instantly meshed with Tyler Ennis and Drew Stafford on the Sabres' top line. [Buffalo Hockey Beat]  • Andrew Cogliano with the real talk after a 7-2 rout at the hands of the Calgary Flames, who have no business routing anybody: "Every guy in the room should be completely embarrassed of how they played tonight. To start one of the biggest road trips, to have a division rival chasing you down and have a ton on the line … no one played at all. It's unexplainable." [LA Times]  • This is for our Canadian readers, both because it's been geoblocked (but we trust you can find a way around that) and because it's pretty specific to this great nation. This Hour Has 22 Minutes, a Canadian sketch-comedy show, riffs on George Stromboulopoulos taking over Hockey Night in Canada, and it's great:
Chicago Dota is not dead. Ignite Gaming Lounge and SteelSeries are thrilled to announce the 2015 Dota 2 Winter Open in Chicago!   The tournament will span two days, where 12 teams will be duking it out in a double elimination bracket for $1,400 prize pool! This time around we're blending both online and LAN competition. Day one will taking place online and the finalists advance to day two at Ignite . Only there, will the final four teams get to battle it out for the grand prize.  Entry Fee:  $100 per team - (Make sure to include your team name and 5 Steam ID's (ex: STEAM_0:1:#########) in the comment box)  Refunds will only be issued up to 14 days prior to the tournament start. No teams may be swapped or sold. If you have a full team and were unable to register, please send an e-mail to chris@ignitegaming.com with your name and phone number in order to be placed on the waitlist.  Your team registration gives you:   A guaranteed spot in the 12-team bracket  Free PC rental for all bracketed games  1 free raffle ticket (raffle on Sunday Finals)  *NEW* 5 Hours of Ignite Game Time ($20 Value) to the 4 teams that do not make it to LAN finals. Must be present on Day 2 to redeem.  Prize Breakdown:  1st place team: $840  2nd place team: $420  3rd place team: $140  + SteelSeries/Dota 2 Merch Raffle prizes  Make sure to show some love to SteelSeries for contributing to the tournament prize pool, they are making this whole thing possible.  Bracket Format:  Best of 3  Double Elimination  Schedule:  DAY ONE - ONLINE  Saturday, January 30th  Check-in @ 10AM  Day 1 ends when 4 teams remain (approx. 8-9PM)   DAY TWO - LAN  Sunday, January 31st  Check-in @ 10AM
Story highlights Police estimate the street value at $2 million  A 4-year-old child was also in the car  (CNN) A Texas woman faces federal drug trafficking charges after police seized 75 pounds of liquid crystal methamphetamine worth $2 million inside her vehicle, according to the Austin Police Department.  The 23-year-old woman from Laredo was stopped for speeding after 11 p.m. on Highway 35 in Austin last week, and officers became suspicious of her during their interaction, APD said in a statement released on Wednesday.  Austin Police estimates the street value of the liquid crystal meth at approximately $2 million.  According to a criminal complaint filed in United States District Court, the suspect initially told police she was traveling to Dallas for a work meeting, but that her story changed during the course of their conversation.  Police say the suspect also acted nervous and became "verbally aggressive," as they pressed her regarding the irregularities in her story. The woman also refused to let Austin Criminal Interdiction Officers search the 2013 Dodge Avenger she was driving, according to the complaint.  Read More
Facebook is preparing to push its new workplace product into a lot more cubicles.  Facebook at Work, a nearly identical version of the social network designed specifically for communicating with colleagues, has been in a closed beta since January. But that pilot program is ending, and the company will likely launch a freemium version of the interoffice network by the end of the year, said Julien Codorniou, head of Facebook at Work, during an interview with Re/code.  This product has been a long time coming. Facebook has been using a version of Facebook at Work internally for years, and reports first surfaced that it was building an office tool for other companies almost 15 months ago. When, exactly, Facebook will launch the product is still unclear. So, too, is whether or not it will be able to convince customers to forgo their existing office products, in some cases with years of archived messaging and documents stored on them.  But Facebook's going to try. More than 100 companies are using Facebook at Work as part of the beta, which is still growing, said Codorniou. Many of those companies are just now starting to expand the product internally. Heineken, for example, has been testing the product with just 40 of its top executives, but plans to expand Facebook at Work to all 550 U.S. employees by the end of September. Linio, a Latin American e-commerce company, is expanding the product internally from 200 to 2,000 employees by the end of the month.  As expected, Facebook does hope to make a little money from the new product, but not with the ad-dominant approach it's known for. Instead, businesses will start with the free version and pay for extra features or analytics associated with their accounts, said Codorniou.  What, exactly, will be free and what will cost money is "still being defined," he added. It's unclear how many employees, for example, each company will be able to onboard without paying up, or if they'll be charged extra to create a large number of groups. Facebook may take an approach similar to Slack, which charges for things like archiving messages and extensive product support.  What is clear, though, is that Facebook is about to step on a few toes. Once Facebook at Work is live, Facebook will start to actively pitch the product through its platform partnerships team, which means it will be in direct competition with Slack and Microsoft, which owns Yammer. (With roughly $340 million in venture money, you can bet Slack won't simply roll over, either.)  After speaking with a small handful of beta customers, it seems clear that "familiarity" will be one of Facebook's key selling points. Many people (okay, most people) already know how to use Facebook.  "If somebody comes into the company, they know how to use this tool from day one," explained Ryan Holmes, CEO of Hootsuite, which is part of the beta group. "So training cost is zero. That's important."  That familiarity could also be one of Facebook's biggest sticking points with possible customers. On the desktop, users are able to toggle between their professional and personal Facebook accounts (Facebook at Work has its own standalone app on mobile). Facebook will need to convince employers that green-lighting Facebook use among the staff won't result in a loss of productivity.  So far, that doesn't seem to be a concern.  "We're a modern company," said José María Pertusa, CMO at Linio. "We actually expect them to use social media. That's the way we acquire most of our customers anyway."  Added Holmes: "It's unrealistic that organizations try to lock people out of social. It's like telling people that they can't have their own personal phone[s], and I think that's how millennials are perceiving that."
When Marshawn Lynch isn't carry the football, Facebook will be carrying the Raiders running back.  Oakland Raiders running back Marshawn Lynch (24) at the preseason game against Seattle Seahawks in Oakland, Calif., Thursday, Aug. 31, 2017. Heidi Fang Las Vegas Review-Journal @HeidiFang  Oakland Raiders running back Marshawn Lynch (24) runs the ball against Tennessee Titans free safety Kevin Byard (31) in the first half of an NFL football game Sunday, Sept. 10, 2017, in Nashville, Tenn. (AP Photo/Mark Zaleski)  Oakland Raiders running back Marshawn Lynch (24) on the sideline in the first half of a NFL preseason game against the Seattle Seahawks in Oakland, Calif., Thursday, Aug. 31, 2017. Heidi Fang Las Vegas Review-Journal @HeidiFang  Oakland Raiders running back Marshawn Lynch (24) and tackle Donald Penn (72) warm up prior to the preseason game against Seattle Seahawks in Oakland, Calif., Thursday, Aug. 31, 2017. Heidi Fang Las Vegas Review-Journal @HeidiFang  ALAMEDA, Calif. — When Marshawn Lynch isn't carrying the football, Facebook will be carrying him.  Bleacher Report has partnered with the Raiders running back's media company, Beast Mode Productions, to create a web series that will debut this fall on Facebook's new "Watch" platform. The partnership, which Bleacher Report announced Tuesday, will amount to eight 10-minute episodes for a show entitled "No Script."  "No Script" episodes will feature many non-football premises such as Lynch riding military tanks, drifting race cars and imitating the voice of Darth Vader while testing virtual reality at Lucasfilm, according to a press release.  "The B/R team and Marshawn have created something we believe fans will love, especially those seeking an alternative to the hot-take debate shows that dominate traditional sports media today," said Rory Brown, president of Bleacher Report, in a statement. "This show is incredibly fun, entertaining, and Marshawn has been a blast to work with. It's a great example of the B/R brand and an athlete's brand partnering together to do great things."  A video team for Beast Mode Productions was seen Sunday in the locker room following the Raiders' 26-16 win over the Tennessee Titans in Nashville. Beast Mode employees also frequented training camp in Napa, California.  Their presence might be for unrelated projects.  Around the NFL, Lynch is regarded for his ability to raise capital through endorsements and other off-the-field ventures.  His No. 24 Raiders jersey quickly became a top-seller upon joining the team in April. He sells clothing products and other merchandise via a Beast Mode store that, along with being accessible online, has a storefront in Oakland. Now, he is co-creating a project for which Facebook, according to Reuters, paid millions of dollars.  Lynch, 31, came out of retirement in April and signed a two-year, $9 million deal with an additional $7.5 million in potential incentives.  Back in the mix  Donald Penn admitted Tuesday he was a little surprised.  He didn't expect to feel so good on Sunday.  This summer, the Raiders left tackle missed all of training camp and played only two offensive series in the preseason because of a contract holdout. Despite the missed time, he was able to play all 66 of the offense's snaps. He vaguely cited the team had a plan to provide him a breather if necessary, but that proved unnecessary.  "I didn't need the blow," Penn said. "I felt good. It feels better when you get the win. We've got a lot of stuff we need to fix, lots of stuff I've got to fix personally. But to get out there and get a win and come out strong as a team, that's good momentum."  Penn's contract situation has yet to be resolved.  A conclusion of some sort is expected this month.  Contact reporter Michael Gehlken at mgehlken@reviewjournal.com. Follow @GehlkenNFL on Twitter.
Locke90 posted...  clone11 posted...  Yes they can apparently. I haven't had it happen yet though.   neither have I but then again it probably depends on the difficulty you are playing at.  ---  Arguing with a lore whore is like banging your head against a wall.   Hmm. I'll have to check on it. I really don't feel like turning my difficulty up.
Several lines of epidemiological studies have indicated that caffeine consumption and plasma uric acid (UA) level were negatively correlated with the incidence of some neurodegenerative diseases. We report here a novel mechanism by which these purine derivatives increase neuronal glutathione (GSH) synthesis. Intraperitoneal injection of caffeine or UA into male C57BL/6 mice significantly increased total GSH levels in the hippocampus. Neither SCH58261, an adenosine A2A receptor antagonist, nor rolipram, a phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitor, increased GSH levels. Pretreatment with allopurinol, a drug to inhibit UA production, did not change the GSH level in the caffeine-treated mice. Hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons treated with caffeine or UA were resistant to oxidant exposure in the slice culture experiments. In experiments with the SH-SY5Y cell line, cysteine uptake was sodium-dependent and pretreatment with caffeine or UA increased cysteine uptake significantly as compared with the control conditions. Slice culture experiments using the hippocampus also showed increased cysteine and GSH contents after the treatment with caffeine or UA. Immunohistochemical analysis showed increased GSH levels in the hippocampal excitatory amino acid carrier-1 (EAAC1)-positive neurons of mice treated with caffeine or UA. These findings suggest that purine derivatives caffeine and UA induce neuronal GSH synthesis by promoting cysteine uptake, leading to neuroprotection.
Devart has released an upgraded version of their SecureBridge component set for Firemonkey in Delphi 10 Seattle. SecureBridge is a set of SSH, SSL, and SFTP components which work on Android, IOS, OSX, and Windows. With SecureBridge you can create SSH, SSL, and SFTP clients and servers to protect your data transfers over insecure networks. The SSH functionality allows you to create an SSH tunnel where you can use your existing application to connect and send data through the SSH tunnel. The SSH tunnel handles the encryption at the TCP level so that you don't have to. You can also use the SSL components which operate at the application level. Support for Blowfish, AES128, AES192, AES256, Cast128, and TripleDES symmetric algorithms is included plus support for RSA and DSA asymmetric algorithms, and SHA1 and MD5 hashing algorithms. SecureBridge is a commercial component suite which utilizes industry standard encryption mechanisms. There are free trials available and the components should work with Appmethod and probably C++Builder.  Head over and check out all of the SecureBridge features before downloading the trial for Firemonkey in Delphi 10 Seattle.
Our customers often come to us for help with advanced SQL queries. Recently, two of them asked us how to do an extrapolation in SQL.  These customers wanted to estimate what their sales would be toward the end of the month, but only had sales numbers for the first few days.  We were happy to help!  The Formula  There are many ways to make predictions. When the data is relatively smooth, one approximation is to simply multiply the current daily average out to the rest of the month:  The SQL  To fill out that formula we need the current sales sum, the number of days so far, and the number of days in the month. The sum is easy and the number of days so far is today's date.  The last date of the month requires some SQL:  Posgres  select extract('day' from (date_trunc('month', now())  + interval '1 month - 1 day'))  MySQL  select day(date(last_day(now())))  Now that we have the number of days in the current month, we can get the daily average and multiply the two together. First, the daily average:  Postgres  select sum(amount) / extract('day' from now()) as avg  from sales  where created_at > date_trunc('month', now())  MySQL  select sum(amount) / day(now()) as avg  from sales  where created_at > date_format(now() ,'%Y-%m-01')  Multiplying the daily average by the number of days in the month gives us our rough approximation:  Postgres  select (sum(amount) / extract('day' from now())) *  extract('day' from (date_trunc('month', now())  + interval '1 month - 1 day')) as estimate  from sales  where created_at > date_trunc('month', now())  MySQL  select sum(amount) / day(now()) *  day(date(last_day(now()))) as estimate  from sales  where created_at > date_format(now() ,'%Y-%m-01')  Now we can extrapolate what sales will be this month. Even better, the estimate will become more accurate as the month progresses and there are more days in the average!  This is a great companion chart for dashboards that are already computing the current month's sales totals so far. Hope you enjoyed it!
Please let the school committee in Cranston, R.I. know that the nation is watching them. Join FFRF (read FFRF's letter here) in urging the committee to do the right thing, and not appeal the Jan. 11 federal appeals court ruling in Jessica Ahlquist's favor. Please take a moment to contact the school committee now, when it counts. The Cranston School Committee is meeting and holding a public hearing on whether to appeal the ruling at 6 p.m., Thursday, Feb. 16. Send a quick email or message urging them not to appeal the ruling.   The 16-year-old sued over an unconstitutional prayer banner hanging at her high school. In ruling in Jessica's favor, the judge noted that she "is clearly an articulate and courageous young woman, who took a brave stand, particularly in light of the hostile response she has received from her community." Jessica, after numerous threats, has had to go to school with police escort! Her state representative called her "an evil little thing" on the radio. Her mayor has spoken against her challenge. She is such a persona non grata in her community that FFRF could not find a nearby floral shop willing to deliver our flowers to her! (See links below).   That the situation has gotten so out of hand is the fault of the school board, which should never have defended the unconstitutional prayer banner. In eking out its decision whether or not to appeal, the board has made Jessica Ahlquist a lightning rod for public opprobrium. It's time for the school board to recognize its role in fomenting community hostility, to stand up for the Constitution and the rights of a teenager. The Rhode Island Chapter of the ACLU, which brought the suit on Jessica's behalf, has already filed a request for repayment of attorney's fees in the amount of $173,000. It is morally wrong and fiscal insanity to consider appealing the ruling.  CONTACT  Please write the Superintendent and Committee Chairperson, and "cc" the others. (Only personal email and phone numbers of Committee members are listed by the school website.)   Cranston School Committee   *Peter Nero - Superintendent  Phone: 401-270-8000  Email: This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it.   *Andrea M. Iannazzi - Chairperson  Home Tel: 401-935-2411  E-mail: This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it.   Frank S. Lombardi - Clerk  Home Tel: 401-942-9774  E-mail:This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it. "> This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it.   Steven Bloom  Home Tel: 401-447-3976  E-mail: This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it.   Stephanie Culhane  Home Tel: 401-781-2119  E-mail: This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it. ">This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it.   Paula McFarland  Home Tel: 401-944-5802  E-mail: This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it.   Janice Ruggieri  Home Tel: 401-944-4832  E-mail: This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it.   Michael A. Traficante  Home Tel: 401-943-0026  E-mail: This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it.  ATTEND SCHOOL BOARD MEETING  If you live in the New England area, you may wish to attend and speak at the hearing. FFRF'ers will be there along with Humanists of Rhode Island, including Ellery Schempp. Ellery, as a high school student, started the famed Abington v. Schempp case in which the Supreme Court decision declared bible readings in schools unconstitutional.  Cranston School Committee Meeting - Thursday, Feb. 16, 2012  Cranston High School East  899 Park Avenue  Cranston, R.I.  6 PM  TALKING POINTS TO SCHOOL COMMITTEE  Feel free to cut and paste. Better yet, use your own words. One or two sentences is effective:   Do not appeal the sound decision of U.S. District Judge Ronald L
I love these crackers they are my favorite snak. But I have noticed that out of some of the boxes I have got over the past few years the cheese has had alot of mold in them. I just got a pack of them yesterday at my local Walmart and the fist one I pull out had mold in it and the packaging wasn't damaged or open prier to me opening it but I just wish they would fix this small issue I have had.
THE 2017 World Cup has captured the public's imagination and breathed life into the game.  The success of minnow nations Tonga and Fiji, as well as the likes of Papua New Guinea, have ignited calls for an annual series between the Pacific nations.  League legend Matty Johns says rugby league must capitalise on the upswing of support and move quickly to make the most of the Cup's success.  He told Triple M Grill Team what must happen next to ensure continued growth of the game.  "What happens next is so important to really capitalise on the gains that have been made," Johns said on Monday.  "They should have a four-team competition between these Pacific nations, from there you pick a Pacific nations representative side to play Australia in a test match.  "The interest around the Pacific nations can sustain interest in the game."  HIGHS, LOWS: How Tonga changed international league forever  VOSSY: What ref outrage proves about rugby league fans  Apisai Koroisau of Fiji swaps jerseys with Cameron Smith.  Australia and England will square off in the Cup final on Saturday, but it's the tier two nations who have arguably garnered more interest from the rugby league public.  PNG already has a team in the Queensland Cup, and plans are in motion to get a Fiji side playing in the NSW competition in the coming years.  Johns' Grill Team co-host Mark Geyer wants the NRL to halt for a month mid-season to allow for representative games, including matches between Pacific nations.  "We keep talking about player burn out around Origin and I hate split rounds, they're just not good for the game, we lose momentum," Geyer said.  "I'd rather see the (NRL) competition stopped for a month and then we play the emerging nations, and even the girls — Australia v New Zealand in the womens."
Stats Growth Chart HP: Normal ATK: Normal RCV: Normal HP | Attack | Recover vs Level HP | Attack | Recover vs Experience Compare Beach Lifeguard, Aqua Chaser with .. Please Select 100%の力・戸愚呂弟 2体で最強の妖, Ushio & Tora 2nd Player Color Andy Bogard 2nd Player Color Athena Asamiya 2nd Player Color Benimaru Nikaido 2nd Player Color Billy Kane 2nd Player Color Kim Kaphwan 2nd Player Color Yuri Sakazaki 3rd Player Color Chin Getsai 3rd Player Color King 3rd Player Color Takuma Sakazaki 3rd Shinsengumi Unit Capt., Saito Hajime 5 Mechdragon Combo, Demon Hadar 5 Mechdragon Fusion, God Canopus 5-Ore Magic Stone Dragon, Mithril Edge 6聖球・サタンマリア 7th Heaven's Owner, Tifa 80%の力・戸愚呂弟 A member of Squad 13, Rukia Kuchiki 堕転したマギ・ジュダル 切札勝舞のスペシャルデッキ 刃龍喚士・リエト 寄道の親愛神・サクヤ 審美的転生注射, Zazan 師団長, Colt 帰ってきたサイヤ人, Vegeta 万天の全能神・ゼウス=ヴァース 三橋&伊藤【原作版】 三船東のエース・茂野吾郎 不破圓明流継承者・不破北斗 七代目武装戦線副頭・藤代拓海 七代目武装戦線頭・村田将五 快援隊名刺 忍ギガ満 志村妙 志村新八 呪紋の化身 エキドナロココ クリスタル・パラディン クリームヒルト ジャスタウェイ ジュスティーヌ&カロリーヌ ジョイラの使い魔 ジン=フリークス やさしい王様・ガッシュ&高嶺清麿 カイト カオス セラの天使 アクア・サーファー アイランドガチャドラ アラジン【原作版】 アテナの使命・沙織 ガンダー ガッシュ&高嶺清麿 ギガ満助 サウスポーの守護神・アテナ サイバー・N・ワールド サーティワン・エメリット サーティワン・アメリット サーティワン・サファリット サーティワン・愛猫神・バステト サーティワン・トパリット サーティワン・ルビリット サーティワン・ダブエメリット サーティワン・ダブアメリット サーティワン・ダブサファリット サーティワン・ダブトパリット サーティワン・ダブルビリット サーティワン・バステト サンタクロース ザ・ニンジャ ザブゴン ザブシャーク シェル・ファクトリーγ シェル・フォートレス シヴ山のドラゴン シャーマンカーン シャーマンラーン シーファン シンデレラ ゼオン&デュフォー ゼリーエンジェル スサノオ王子 スーパー覚醒マシンゼウス スーパー超覚醒ゼウス コカ・コーラたまドラ コルト隊兵隊長, Rammot コロッケ コッコ・ルピア あざ笑う雪だるま・ジャックフロスト 坂本辰馬 キャシー・クレイジー キューピッド キン肉族超人予言書 キリン 坂田銀時 坂田銀時
XMP Burster Level 1  Level 4  Level 6  Level 8 Category Weapons Rarity(s) Very Common XM Cost Variable Recycle Value  20 - 160 XM (Depends on item level)  XMP Bursters are the primary weapons used to attack enemy Portals. XMP's are obtained through hacking Portals and drop in large numbers. XMP's cause, and are affected by, Speed Lock.  Contents show]  Use Edit  XMP Bursters are used from the Fire sub-menu. The agent invokes the menu by selecting a weapon from the Inventory and tapping 'Fire', or by holding a finger on the Scanner map and sliding it upwards. Tapping 'Fire' from this menu detonates the XMP, which inflicts damage to nearby Resonators and can destroy Portal Mods.  A fired XMP's area of effect is centered on the Agent and has a radius proportional to the XMP's level. Resonators closer to the blast's center will take more damage, and Mods attached to Portals closer to the center have an increased chance of breaking.  Portals whose Resonators have been damaged have a chance to Counterattack the agent.  The XMP damages Resonators by reducing their current XM, and is affected by Mitigation. Damage reduction from mitigation is rounded down, so each Resonator in range will take at least 1 XM of damage from each XMP fired.  Charging an XMP Edit  Holding 'Fire' charges the XMP and applies up to 20% bonus damage. The smaller the XM ring is when the 'Fire' button is released, the more bonus damage will be added. At least 1% bonus damage is added if the XMP is charged.  The in-game tutorial refers to this technique as charging, but some communities refer to it as a Glyph Attack, due to the gesture's similarity with the Glyph Hacking launch.  Levels Edit  Like all leveled items, XMP Bursters are available in eight levels and can only be used by agents that meet or exceed the item's level. Each level increases in damage, range, and cost. Bursters lower the energy levels of struck resonators and portal mods following this scheme:  Recycling an XMP yields (20 * L) XM , where L is the level of the item.  Critical Hits Edit  Whenever a Burster damages a Portal, there is a small chance for it to deal triple damage. These critical hits are indicated by an exclamation point appearing before the damage indicator.  Community trials suggest that critical hits can also be scored against Portal Mods, but the lack of indication makes confirmation difficult.  Stacking Edit  While XMP Bursters will only fire individually, multiple XMP's can be queued up by firing in close succession. These will fire as the Ingress server processes the effects of previous attacks.  Note that if the agent's XM reserves are completely depleted by Portal counterattacks, all stacked XMP blasts are cancelled. Agents are advised to consume cubes before stacking XMP's to avoid this damage-reducing consequence.  Pinging Edit  Firing an XMP of any level causes all shielded Portals onscreen to display an animation, even if it received no damage. This technique, informally called 'pinging', quickly exposes weak spots in an area.  Lore Edit  XMP Bursters, short for Exotic Matter Pulse Bursters, are XM constructs, one of the fundamental templates found in Earth's Exotic Matter matrix before storyline NPC's began developing their own. The items are formed of compressed Exotic Matter that, when released by an agent's scanner, scramble enemy XM structures and cause them to collapse.  The mechanism by which the blast affects enemy Portals, but not dropped items, friendly Portals, or agents themselves, is unknown.  Also see the Ultra Strike — a specialized Burster.
The CDC states that the condition is not caused by an infection or anything in the environment.  The CDC study also included a lab analysis of skin fibers in Morgellons patients. The analysis showed that these fibers were mostly cotton, such as typically found in clothing or bandages.  CDC research also revealed that the skin sores seemed to be the result of long-term picking and scratching the skin.  The CDC report goes on to say: "We were not able to conclude, based on this study, whether this unexplained dermopathy represents a new condition, as has been proposed by those who use the term Morgellons, or wider recognition of an existing condition such as delusional parasitosis."  The results of the CDC study have been archived and are no longer updated. The CDC does not plan to do any further research on the matter.  Besides the CDC, other research teams have contributed to the debate on Morgellons.  Previous case studies and research have suggested that Morgellons may be linked to Lyme disease. Some patients with signs and symptoms of Morgellons had tested positive for the bacteria that causes Lyme disease.  But according to Morgellons researchers at Oklahoma State University, there is no evidence to prove this theory. Likewise, there was no evidence of Lyme infection in any of the people in the CDC study.  A 2010 study found a potential link between Morgellons symptoms and an underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism). More research needs to be done to further investigate this finding.  Morgellons also appears similar to a condition seen in cattle called bovine digital dermatitis, which is due to an infection, according to a 2011 study. But no conclusions can be reached from these small studies.
Tyler Durden lives in the sequel to Chuck Palahniuk's Fight Club book! Some imaginary friends never go away, they may hide under the surface for a time, but they'll never truly be gone.   Such is the case for Sebastian. The Fight Club comic book picks up ten years after Project Mayhem where Sebastian lives a mundane life. He married Marla, and together they had a kid. Sebastian has been medicating to suppress his inner Tyler--to keep his destiny at bay.   But the tranquility has gotten to Marla. She's been cutting her husband's meds...so she can cheat with Tyler. She's about to learn that once you let this genie out of the bottle, you won't be able to contain him again.   With Fight Club 2, Dark Horse and Chuck Palahniuk prove it's time to Rize or Die. One of the most anticipated comic books of the year, you've got to buy Fight Club 2 online now while you still can!   Written by Chuck Palahniuk with art by Cameron Stewart, Dave Stewart & Nate Piekos, Fight Club #1 is going to knock your socks off!   One of ComicBook.com's Top 10 Comic Events We Can't Wait For in 2015!   "The first rule of Fight Club might be not to talk about it, but tongues are already wagging about Chuck Palahniuk's sequel to his 1996 novel." -The Telegraph (London)   "Just wait until you see what happens next." -Hollywood Reporter Heat Vision, 5 Comics to Look Out For in 2015
Most fans are still reeling following the Denver Broncos' 20-27 loss to the San Diego Chargers Thursday night. In the past few days, I have read comment after comment; I have witnessed first hand the woeful, depressed attitude of Mile High Country; I have felt the apocalypse nigh on the 2013 season.  The tweets and emails and comments have all been similar:  "The season might as well be over."  "How can a team that is thought to be a Super Bowl contender lose so easily at home?"  "How are we supposed to advance in the playoffs with this defense?"  "If Manning has a bad game in the playoffs, we're through."  While all of those items are concerning, I have another point of view. The sky isn't falling for me, even if I have joked about it in the past few days.  This loss gives me hope. And it's all because of the words of Terrell Davis.  I had the opportunity to talk with the Broncos Ring of Famer during my trip to Broncos training camp this August, as he was visiting as an analyst for the NFL Network. Davis was gracious enough to give this blogger and other beat writers several minutes of his time, and I took the opportunity to ask him about his experiences through the 1996, 1997 and 1998 seasons. He said some very interesting comments in those 15 minutes, but one comment in particular resonated with me. One comment I stashed away, saving it for a week exactly like this.  The question was basically, "Why do you think the Broncos lost in January last year?" His answer: They hadn't lost since October.  "Last year just felt like (the Broncos) were winning games too easily, and I always felt that there's something to be said about a quality loss," Davis said. "People underestimate that loss late in November or December. Not to say that you go out there and try to lose a game, but it's a chance for the team to refocus, recalibrate, look at the things that you've been sweeping under the rug because you've been winning games so many times."  "Last year just felt like (the Broncos) were winning games too easily.... People underestimate that loss late in November or December." - Terrell Davis  Denver's experience last year certainly lends credence to Davis' claim. The Broncos won 11 straight games heading into the 2012 playoffs. They had beaten every one of those teams by a touchdown or more. They were the top seed in the AFC. They had home field advantage throughout the playoffs. They earned a bye week.  They lost in their first playoff game in double overtime.  Perhaps what was missing from that 2012 season's formula was a loss in December.  "I remember we didn't have a Monday practice for 14 games," Davis continued, talking about the 1998 season, and how the team only met on Mondays following a loss. "It was a long stretch. And when we finally had our meeting, we went through things that we were deficient in. (Before) it was, 'Hey man, we won it, so who cares about that?' And that's what happens when teams go on these long runs; they just don't look at some of the details because they've won those games.  "When you lose, you come here on Monday, you go through a lot of film, you come back on Wednesday, more film," said Davis. "You get a chance to really look at some of the things that you didn't do so well and why you lost the game.  "Denver didn't have their chance late in the season; they were just rolling out wins. And they really weren't close games, either."  The season is not over, Broncos fans. Far from it. If Denver's December loss to San Diego becomes a learning experience, and an opportunity for the team to refocus their efforts, then this frustration you and the players feel now will have borne fire come January. And maybe February.  It may all be worth it in the end.
The Balfour Declaration is just 67 words - one very long sentence on a small piece of paper issued on November 2nd 1917. But the effects of that sentence are still felt to this day across the Middle East. In the ferment of debate generated by the centenary of the Balfour Declaration this year David Reynolds goes back to its historical roots: to find out how and why it was conceived. Because that document cannot be understood apart from the dramatic autumn of 1917, when the Great War hung in the balance. Britain's Russian ally was on the verge of collapse amidst revolution. The Ottoman empire's military success against British imperial forces was now finally foundering. After the terrible British setbacks of Gallipoli, Kut & disappointment in the war for the Holy Land, General Allenby was finally poised for victory in Palestine. On December the 9th he was able to grant prime minister Lloyd George his Christmas present of Jerusalem's 'liberation' from centuries of Ottoman rule. By that time the fateful Balfour Declaration had been issued in London. Its impact could barely be absorbed across war torn Palestine still suffering the privations of famine, plague and conflict . In London, the small Zionist movement were delighted by their role in shaping the Declaration yet they were just part of a tangle of British imperial planning that, in late 1917, had seen a chance to decide the war and also define the peace. Manipulating Jews and Arabs, Russia and America, British decision makers were convinced of their ability to pull the strings of world politics. But not for the first time (or the last) British leaders would become victims of their own hubris. The very long sentence was a very British story.  Producer: Mark Burman.
A new poll shows a sharp decline in support of President Obama's policies in the Middle East.  The poll, which was conducted by the Arab American Institute in six Middle Eastern countries, shows Obama's ratings at 10% or less, and reflects negative sentiments toward American policies in the region.  U.S. President Barack Obama arriving at the AIPAC Conference dais for his keynote address on May 22, 2011. AP  According to the poll, 88% of Moroccans think that the president has not met the expectations laid out in his 2009 'Cairo speech', while 90% of Egyptians said they are dissatisfied with his policies. Disappointment was highest in Lebanon, where 99% disapprove of Obama's policies, as opposed to Saudi Arabia, where 77% felt let down.  The poll also shows that both the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and US interference in the region are seen as the biggest obstacle to peace and stability. Many also noted that the America's role in establishing a no-fly zone over Libya, and the killing of Osama bin Laden as the other major factors contributing to their disapproval.  According to AAI President, Dr. James Zogby, President Obama did not create the problems, but rather created the expectations that the problems will be solved. Zogby said that when confronted with the possibility of low approval ratings, the administration "was not surprised".  Keep updated: Sign up to our newsletter Email * Please enter a valid email address Sign up Please wait… Thank you for signing up. We've got more newsletters we think you'll find interesting. Click here Oops. Something went wrong. Please try again later. Try again Thank you, The email address you have provided is already registered. Close  Zogby said he understands Obama is strained by domestic policy issues, but that in order to stay relevant, he should be more attentive to the attitudes of the people. "We are operating in the region as if everybody loves us – and they don't. You can't be cheating on your own principles and expect people to say: you are great."  Most telling is the fact that approval ratings of U.S. policies are now lower than those published during the end of George W. Bush's second term, and that Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's policies are perceived more positively than those of Obama's in every country polled except for Saudi Arabia.
Weekly Update  Last week, we landed 42 PRs in the TiDB repositories and 29 PRs in the TiKV repositories.  New release  Added  Fixed  Improved  Added  Fixed  Panic directly if the RocksDB writes fail to fix 1262.  Add the start time for store monitor to fix 1207.  time for store monitor to fix 1207. Return the 'no leader' error to avoid panic when calling the GetLeader API with no leader.  Improved
YouTube  YouTube PU2yTdG75vA  APR is pleased to present the B7 RS4 4.2L FSI V8 Stage III+ TVS1740 Supercharger System!Since the release of the B7 RS4, Audi's technological advances on RS models have grown dramatically. However, this often came along with the removal of traditional manual 6-speed transmissions many RS owners have grown to love. APR quickly realized the RS4 represented one of Audi's last great performance sedans and chose to continue advancing the platform more than half a decade after the last RS4 rolled off the production line.APR's technical reach has grown enormously since opening in the 1990's and currently represents a force of unmatched performance without compromise in the performance enhancement sector for Audi vehicles. Our previously available APR Stage III TVS1320 Supercharger System found its way on to several hundred RS4s around the world, making it the most popular and reliable system on the market. With more than four years' worth of RS4 supercharger engineering research, development and testing, APR's new Stage III+ TVS1740 Supercharger System represents the pinnacle of Audi's German engineering enhanced by APR's American ingenuity.In the factory form, Audi's older high revving FSI V8 leaves much to be desired compared to some of the latest technological advances brought forth by Quattro GmbH in recent years. The APR Stage III+ TVS1740 Supercharger System fills the void by adding an average of roughly 40% more horsepower and torque across the entire power band. The results are nothing short of amazing; taking the RS4 from 414 horsepower to 626 horsepower on pump fuel and 688 on race fuel without breaking a sweat! With more than 500 FT-LBS on tap thanks to the TVS1740's positive displacement supercharger expect instant acceleration with absolutely no lag commonly associated with other forms of forced induction.At the heart of the APR Stage III+ Supercharger System is Eaton's latest Twin Vortices Series (TVS) supercharger unit, the TVS1740. The supercharger system is a positive displacement, roots style pump, utilizing Eaton's lightweight, four-lobe 160 degree twisted rotors. Cast and assembled as a single, OEM-style-manifold and rotating group housing, the unit is quiet, compact, attractive, easy to install, and requires little to no extra maintenance to the unit itself.The positive displacement supercharger offers power instantly as the throttle is pressed. Boost pressure builds with no perceived lag commonly associated with other types of forced induction, and provides a large increase in torque across the entire power band. Throttle control is linear and predictable and makes for an excellent driving experience both in daily driving and wide-open acceleration.Since the supercharger does not compress air as it moves through the roots, it's extremely efficient during light throttle and cruising situations. Unlike screw-type positive displacement superchargers that are always compressing, the TVS unit can internally bypass unwanted air, resulting in negligible parasitic loss during cruising and thus far greater fuel economy.The single cast unit and appropriately sized rotating group eliminates potential leak points and allows for a slim, compact design without sacrificing key airflow design characteristics. The unit features a high velocity flow path through the supercharger rotors and an unrestricted discharge port into the appropriately sized plenum. The large plenum equalizes flow across all ports as air feeds evenly through the low-pressure-drop, dual-internal air-to-water heat exchangers. Finally, the ports are separated into individual runners, offering greater operation by eliminating cross talk.Internally the dual heat exchangers offer technological advances shared by Formula 1 teams around the globe. Each unit features a louvered fin design, which minimizes pressure drop while achieving excellent cooling effectiveness. The extruded multi-rib tubing maximizes heat extraction to be carried away through the large bore coolant recirculation hard lines. Externally, supercharger coolant is pumped through a large front mounted heat exchanger where it's cooled and circulated back through the charger again.The factory Bosch MED 9 engine management system is responsible for proper operation of the engine during constantly changing environmental and load conditions. With built in compensational data for environmental variables and varying load conditions, the factory ECU is far more complex and intelligent than units found in other vehicle makes and marques.With the significant amount of changes included in the APR Stage III+ TVS1740 Supercharger System, APR's Engineers spent months calibrating the engine management system, including well over 100+ hours of in-house chassis dyno development. Drivability, gear changes, cruising and part throttle operation were tuned to operate smoothly as if intended by the OEM. Further development was performed putting the vehicle through performance evaluation and durability testing at the drag strip. APR's Electrical Engineers built new coding functions, strategies and routines into the ECU to control conditions normally unseen at factory power levels. Thanks
The preseason doesn't matter. We run through the same stuff every year, only with different faces. There's the bad team that looks great in meaningless action. The reclamation project at quarterback who looks revitalized and new. The unknown prospect who runs through third-team defenses for big plays. Occasionally, those teams and players do turn out to deliver on their promise, but there are so many washouts and false positives to go with those success stories that it's impossible to figure out who is for real until the meaningful football starts in September. Let's put the preseason in some context to understand how it's not worth taking too seriously.  The Difference  How is preseason football different from the real thing? Well, there are the starters, ramping up to Week 3 before mostly sitting out in Week 4. Coaches try to optimize their decision-making to avoid getting players injured. Effort levels vary from team to team; bettors notably prefer some coaches (Mike Shanahan is a classic example) to others (hi, Ken Whisenhunt) by virtue of how their teams have performed in the past. Somewhat surprisingly, though, the half-full stadiums and modest energy levels of preseason crowds have little impact on home-field advantage. Since 2006, the home team has won 56.5 percent of preseason games; that's virtually identical to the regular-season win rate over that time frame, 56.8 percent.  Checking the statistical record, preseason football is different from the real thing in more subtle ways. According to the NFL's numbers, here's what August football is lacking (and why):  1. Scoring goes down. While preseason scoring has risen over the past several seasons, that has been met with a simultaneous increase in scoring during the regular seasons. Since 2006, the scoring in a typical preseason game is down about 14 percent from the scoring level during the subsequent regular season. Last year, while teams averaged 41.3 points per game during the preseason, the league then produced 46.8 points per game during the regular season, the largest per-game average since 1948. Peyton Manning barely knew what he was doing back then. Preseason scoring in 2013, then, was down 11.8 percent from where it would land during the season to come.  In 2014? That's holding true. Penalties are up dramatically, with the emphasis on illegal contact and defensive holding extending drives, but scoring is basically holding still with where it was one year ago. Teams have averaged 41.4 points per game during the preseason through the Monday Night Finger Football tilt between Washington and Cleveland, just one-tenth of one point higher than last year's average.  Why does scoring go down? Well, as you might expect …  2. Teams aren't as efficient on offense. Big surprise, right? There's no smoking gun for offenses in the preseason, but numbers drop across the board a tiny bit. For one, teams run the ball more frequently during the preseason; 55.5 percent of all offensive snaps during the preseason are pass plays, a figure that rises to 56.6 percent during the regular season. There's also about one less play from scrimmage per game versus the regular season.  When teams do throw the ball, they're less efficient, with passer rating declining by nearly five points:  Season Cmp Att Cmp% Yds Y/Att TD INT Rating Preseason 17,464 29,453 59.3% 180,086 6.1 992 773 77.3 Regular Season 73,192 120,563 60.7% 792,855 6.6 5,071 3,506 81.9  Five points doesn't seem like all that many, but it's roughly the difference between the passer ratings of Ryan Fitzpatrick (82.0) and Jason Campbell (76.9) from a year ago. What? It still doesn't seem that different? OK, fair enough. But you can see that preseason passers aren't quite as impressive with the ball in their hands. Passers are also sacked less frequently, with their sack rate rising from 6.3 percent in the preseason to 6.8 percent during the subsequent regular season.  Perhaps most notably, teams are far worse at running the ball in the preseason than they are during the regular season. Over those weird 2006-08 and 2010-13 time frames, offenses averaged 4.2 yards per carry on the ground during the regular season. In the preseason, they mustered up only 3.9 yards per rushing attempt. That adds up; teams average about 28 rushing plays each per game, so you're looking at a difference of just less than 17 yards between the two teams per game.  3. Quarterbacks aren't as good as they are during the regular season. The typical preseason player at a given position on a given snap is obviously worse than his counterpart at the same position during the regular season, but great quarterbacks are more scarce than great players at any other position
41 people were brutally murdered in Omaha last year.  Some of those people were killed by suspects who had enjoyed automatic good time early release sometime in the past.  2 Cougars were killed recently in Nebraska.  The creatures were legally harvested per Nebraska law.  Guess which of the two above mentioned deaths Senator Chambers has sworn to "avenge" by changing state law?  Why can't he at least "avenge" both?
PITTSBURGH – After two years with the Angels, David Freese wanted to stay.  "I wanted to be an Angel," Freese said Sunday. "I can't hide that. From Day 1, I wanted to come back. I loved the guys. We had unfinished business. It just didn't happen."  A free agent last winter, Freese said there was "no offer but there was dialogue" with the Angels early in the offseason. Once the Angels acquired Yunel Escobar in early December, Freese knew his days in Anaheim were over, and he was disappointed.  "The last two years, being with that group, getting to the playoffs and just trying to be part of something cool, it was a good transition period in my life," Freese said.  Once the Angels passed on Freese, he said the Chicago White Sox and Cleveland Indians were the other two teams he felt could use a third baseman with his experience. The Indians signed Juan Uribe and the White Sox traded for Todd Frazier, leaving Freese out in the cold.  "I felt like I could still be an everyday third baseman for a year or two so I stuck with it, and then the winter kept getting later and nothing was unfolding and no injuries were happening," Freese said.  It wasn't until March that Freese signed with the Pirates, who needed a short-term fill-in while Jung Ho Kang came back from an injury. Now, Freese spends most of his time on the Pirates bench.
Pakistan Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif today called Prime Minister Narendra Modi to condole the loss of lives in India in the recent earthquake.  "Got a call from PM Nawaz Sharif. He expressed condolences on the loss of lives in various parts of India due to the earthquake," Modi tweeted.  Got a call from PM Nawaz Sharif. He expressed condolences on the loss of lives in various parts of India due to the Earthquake. April 30, 2015  Sharif also appreciated India's efforts in the rescue operations in Nepal, Modi said, adding he thanked the Pakistan leader for his "kind words".  During the conversation, Modi said he suggested to Sharif that SAARC nations should conduct regular joint exercises on disaster relief and rescue. "SAARC Nations can come together & hold annual exercises of rescue teams, doctors etc on how we can minimise damage during natural disasters," the Indian Prime Minister said.  "PM Sharif appreciated this idea & told me that we should take up such an initiative," he said in another tweet. The two Prime Ministers also discussed the unseasonal rains and its adverse impact on the crops.
0  Lionel Wigram knows a thing or two about escapist fantasies. The blockbuster movie producer has his roots in the wizarding world of Harry Potter, for which he produced the final four films in the multi-billion dollar franchise. Since then, Wigram has kept himself busy at Warner Bros. with a hand in Sherlock Holmes, Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them., and the woefully under-appreciated The Man from UNCLE. Now, he's teaming with his Sherlock and UNCLE director Guy Ritchie once again to reimagine Arthurian legend into a world of broad fantasy and sweeping magic defined with Ritchie's signature stylistic flair.  Back in summer of 2015, I visited the set of King Arthur at Warner Bros. Leavesden studios, outside of London, where I joined a small group of journalists to tour the elaborate sets and costumes, observe filming, and chat with the creative team. Be sure to check out what I learned on the King Arthur set and read our full interview with stars Charlie Hunnam and Djimon Hounsou.  One of the people we spent the most time speaking with was Wigram, who is reteaming with Ritchie as producer and co-writer for the third time on King Arthur. As a major driving force behind the edgy adaptation, Wigram had plenty to say about why Arthurian legend has endured over the centuries and how they're redefining that legend into a high-action fantasy epic. He also talked about why we won't be seeing much of classic characters like Merlin and Lancelot and how the King Arthur franchise, which is looking at a potential six-film run if things go well at the box office, was originally envisioned as a sort of Camelot-style shared universe. Read the full interview below.  What can you tell us that we don't already know about this movie? How would you describe it?  WIGRAM: I hope it's the sort of – it's King Arthur for today's audience – it's what Guy and I tried to do for Sherlock and The Man From UNCLE, we're trying to do with the sword and sorcery fantasy genre. King Arthur was one of the most important stories ever told, for various thematic reasons. We've tried to keep those themes, we've tried to keep some of the very important tropes, but we've also reinvented in various different ways, which will hopefully – Arthur experts will go "that's fine that they chose to do that, they took the idea in this direction rather than the regular direction" – and we've tried to make what we thought – since Excalibur, which was great fun in its day, there hasn't really been a fun, fantasy adventure, big event version of this. King Arthur is a fairy tale, there should be monsters, there should be magic, and so we wanted to deliver that, because that's the King Arthur we want to see.  Do you find it surprising that there isn't one definitive King Arthur movie in the way that there's the Eroll Flynn Robin Hood, Wizard of Oz…  WIGRAM: I agree.  Why is that?  WIGRAM: I have concluded, having worked on various different King Arthur projects over the years, and tackled that story, and having read Le Mort D'Arthur, and having grown up on those fairy tales as a kid, I think it really comes from the source of it. King Arthur was a bunch of different tales from oral tradition put together, really by Thomas Mallory first – there were other, prior, there was a French romance in the 12th Century – but it was really just a group of oral tales put together into a coherent narrative, which isn't really fully coherent. What it really is is a series of wonderful stories, different quest stories. Yes, of course, there's the pulling of the sword from the stone, there's all that, but then there's also these different quests, these different journeys. There's the whole Grail issue, there's Tristan, there's all sorts of different stories mulched together. And what it's really about, is it's a very interesting examination of the human condition, I think. It's how ideals and attempts at being civilized are quashed by human emotion, and how the best of intentions go wrong, which I think is very interesting. I think that's why [those] stories are so resonant, even today.  Interestingly enough, I think it was also a piece of propaganda, as sort of primer for how a knight should be. Imagine in the 13th and 14th Century, there were all these knights and nobles who were warriors. Their main job in life is to go to war and win territory, and that's how they get rich. Now they're back at home, in time of peace, what do you with them? What are they supposed to do with themselves? How do you stop them fighting amongst each other?
Jun 24, 2017: Denham's Dentrifice is totally anachronistic and overly silly. The constant irreverent humor is either a product of stubborn integrity or of a particularly productive form of madness. If these things sounded more like a warning to you than odd praise, turn back now! There is nothing here for you. If, however, the idea of Monty Python's Flying Circus put to pen and prose sounds appealing, god's speed, you just found your new home.  Denham's Dentrifice is written by Phineas Clockword, and honestly the title and the author's name should tell you everything you need to know about the sense of humor in store for you. The website is not a single serial or concept (outside of the very silly humor shared throughout), but instead is a collection of short stories. As of this writing I have read "Goatlegs", "The Intermediates", "The Blooms of Perennial Wisdom", and "Of Wood, Voodooand Llama". For the purpose of this review I will be focusing on Phineas Clockword's prose and writing style instead of any one story.  Phineas Clockword's writing style often flirts with purple prose. This is done entirely tongue-in-check, however, and the effect is often comical. The styling is often reminiscent of late nineteenth century literature, and, depending on the story, can be either very tight and minimalist, or extraordinarily verbose and meandering. It is hard to get grounded when reading these short stories, as the writing can be very anachronistic and can feel confusing. The author does not allow for any kind of footing on the readers part until a punchline is delivered, which I found to be immensely clever. The punchlines then become revelatory, the reader not only gets the satisfaction of a completed joke, but they also gain a sense of clarity about the story that feels earned. Making "the twist" in his stories,(where the reader's expectations are turned on their heads) the punchline is a strategy that is well executed and it is one that I admire.  Not every joke lands, and though my opinion on what I have read is mostly positive I do have some criticisms. The style of writing can be too confusing at times, and sometimes the style does more than flirt with purple prose. Though most of the time I found the nineteenth century like musings to be pleasant, it does act as an occasional stop gap and reader flow was sometimes hard to obtain. Updating is sporadic, with nothing posted this month as of this writing. This is a small objection as it only annoys me because I find myself thirsty for more, but it is still worth noting.  Though I know better, it is very hard for me to imagine these short stories written on anything other than an old Underwood typewriter next to a rubber duck that is somehow NECESSARY to the process. Phineas Clockwood has worked very hard to create a sense of silliness that is as witty as it is obligatory. This sort of things vibes very well for me, but I can easily see it being off putting to others. I do not suggest binge reading Denham's Dentrifice (that might actually be bad for one's sanity) but the site is perfect for a quick stop a day.  3 of 3 members found this review helpful.  Help us improve! Register or log in to rate this review.
Jump to Section Methods and Materials Patient Selection Study Design and Recruitment Laboratory Methods Data Analyses and Statistics Results Demographics Efficacy Outcomes Fatty Acid Biomarkers Adverse Events Discussion Appendix A. Supplementary Materials References  Two hundred seven patients with HCV were screened, 162 of them consented to participate and were randomized to the study, and all of them completed the 2-week trial; 152 participants were followed throughout the 24 weeks of IFN-α treatment and were included in the analysis. For allocation of the participants following simple double-blind randomization procedures, a computer-generated list of random numbers was used. The identical capsules were prepacked in bottles and consecutively numbered according to the randomization schedule by an independent nutritionist.  Figure S1Figure S1 in Supplement 1Supplement 1 provides a flow chart summarizing study recruitment. Ten subjects discontinued the IFN-α treatment; they did not differ from the completers in any demographic features, including gender, age, married status, education years, and past history of depression. While the noncompleters did have significantly higher baseline scores than completers in depressive symptoms (Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression [HAMD]: 8.6 ± 3.65 versus 4.5 ± 4.49; p = .018) and neurovegetative symptoms (Neurotoxicity Rating Scale [NTRS]: 52.9 ± 41.74 versus 26.9 ± 29.58; p = .010), they were equally distributed among the three groups (EPA, n = 4; DHA, n = 3; placebo, n = 3).  The subjects were randomly assigned in double-blind fashion to EPA, DHA, or placebo, administered for 2 weeks before starting IFN-α therapy. Specifically, 2 weeks before the initiation of IFN-α therapy (week –2), patients started receiving a daily treatment of five identical capsules of EPA (3.5 g/day), DHA (1.75 g/day), or placebo (high oleic oil) in single or divided administration. The experimental capsules contained concentrated EPA (700 mg), DHA (350 mg), or high oleic oil (800 mg); they weighed 1000 mg, were deodorized with orange flavor, and were supplemented with tertiary-butyl hydroquinone (.2 mg/g) and tocopherols (2 mg/g) as antioxidants. The sources of EPA, DHA, and oleic acids were, respectively, anchovy fish body oil (purchased from AK BioTech, Ulsan, Korea), algal vegetable (purchased from DSM Nutritional Products, Basel, Switzerland), and safflower oil (purchased from Aarhus Karlshamn, Hull, England).  The recruited participants were evaluated at weeks –2 (when omega-3 fatty acid prophylactic intervention started) and 0 (when the prophylactic intervention stopped and IFN-α therapy started) and during weeks 2, 4, 6, 8, 12, 16, 20, and 24 of IFN-α therapy to assess the occurrence of major depressive episode with the structured Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview. Sociodemographic factors, including gender, age, education, and marital status, as well as the past psychiatric history, substance use history, and family psychiatric history, were recorded at the initial assessment. Severity of depressive symptoms and of neurovegetative symptoms were measured using, respectively, the 21-item HAMD (48x48Hamilton, M. A rating scale for depression. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. ; 23: 56–62  Crossref | PubMed | Scopus (20814) | Google ScholarSee all References)(48), rated by trained psychiatrists, and the self-administered NTRS (49x49Valentine, A.D., Meyers, C.A., and Talpaz, M. Treatment of neurotoxic side effects of interferon-alpha with naltrexone. Cancer Invest. ; 13: 561–566  Crossref | PubMed | Scopus (86) | Google ScholarSee all References)(49), both administered at weeks –2, 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 12, 16, 20, and 24. The NTRS is a checklist questionnaire that has been frequently used for the evaluation of neuropsychiatric symptoms related to cytokine therapy; the items are categorized into general symptoms, nonpainful somatic symptoms, and painful somatic symptoms, with each item rated from 0 to 10 on a visual analog scale, and the final score ranging 0 to 390 (15x15Musselman, D.L., Lawson, D.H., Gumnick, J.F., Manatunga, A.K., Penna, S., Goodkin, R.S. et al. Paroxetine for the prevention of depression induced
http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Manga/Yuyuhakusho  "The other world 's not watching for nothing!"  "And so it all begins. This boy's name is Yusuke. He's 14 years old, and is supposed to be the hero of this story, but oddly enough... he's dead."  Originally a manga by Yoshihiro Togashi, YuYu Hakusho (also romanized as Yuu Yuu Hakusho) tells the story of Yusuke Urameshi, a bitter, beleaguered, junior high punk — and legendary street fighter. One particularly bad day gets worse for Yusuke after he dies saving the life of a small boy from a car accident. He discovers that the forces of the Spirit World were expecting the boy to miraculously survive the accident but did not expect Yusuke to even be a part of it. Because of this surprising (if ultimately useless) Heroic Sacrifice, they offer Yusuke a chance to return from the dead. With the help of Botan (a perky female shinigami "Angel of Death" or essentially "Grim Reaper") and the approval of Koenma (the snarky son of King Enma, the judge of the dead in the Buddhist belief system, and the part-time stand-in for his father) Yusuke returns to the living world.  But Koenma has other plans for Yusuke, as both his fighting ability and newfound spirit awareness makes him a prime candidate to be a Spirit Detective, an agent of the spirit world hunting down renegade demons who threaten peace on Earth. With much reluctance, Yusuke takes on the job, and finds himself facing all manner of supernatural baddies. Lucky for him, he has the help of Botan as a liaison and tactical support. Early on in his career they send him to the Old Master Genkai, a short, crotchety old woman who nevertheless is a highly capable spiritual guru and martial artist.  As his closest teammates, he gathers some more than capable fighting partners in the form of Kazuma Kuwabara, his old school rival; Kurama, a benevolent reformed fox-spirit trapped in a human body; and Hiei, a not-so-benevolent, not-so-reformed demon who reluctantly tags along with Yusuke and his entourage as part of his sentence.  Serialized in 1990, Yu Yu Hakusho became an instant phenomenon throughout Japanese culture and set many standards in the art of storytelling , and animation-wise, fight choreography; becoming one of JUMPs "Golden Trio" alongside Dragon Ball and Slam Dunk, bringing sales up to their record all-time high of over six million copies nationwide. During YuYu Hakusho's initial animation run in Japan, it was one of the few shows to compete at all with Dragon Ball Z during the early '90s. It is a classic shonen anime featuring colorful characters, lots of humor, and very clever fights. It wasn't as popular in the States as other series, but was one of the first anime to air (mostly uncut) on [adult swim], until it migrated to Toonami with an edited weekday version. It was among Funimation's earliest shows to dub alongside Dragon Ball Z, and therefore, starred some of its earliest regular cast members and kickstarted their reputation. Then 19 year old Justin Cook, who was the Line Producer and played the lead role, is now the chief producer at the studio. In the Philippines, the series was titled "Ghost Fighter" (and with different character names) and went on to be one of the landmark anime series there as well.  Character Sheet is here.  This show provides examples of:  open/close all folders  A  B  C  D  E  F  G-H  I-L  M-N  O-R  S  T-Z
Ogopopgo's are the great creatures that have lived in the Okanagan Lake systems for much longer than the human population around the lakes.  http://ogopogomonster.com/ one of many sightings  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Squally_Point Okanagan Lake 135 km long, 232 m. deep  http://okanagan.com/ogopogo/ statue of Ogopogo in Pentiction  http://www.sellingkelowna.com/kelowna_info/okanaganlake.htm maps and location  The Okanagan Lake system is the headwaters of the Columbia River systems. The mighty Columbia enters the Pacific in Astoria Oregon, from its origin in tha Canadian Rockies. Now with 14 dams or more, and many devastating irrigation channels, the Columbia is still one of the most important salmon rivers in the world.  http://worldwidescience.org/topicpages/d/dam+annual+progress.html white sturgeon migration papers  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Columbia_River 14 dams and more  http://americanhistory.si.edu/onthewater/exhibition/3_6.html some history  In the upper reaches of this fantastic river system lives some prehistoric creatures. The Ogopogo. Many have seen them, some have filmed them, many have searched for them; and the reclusive creatures have eluded them all.  http://www.virtualmuseum.ca/Exhibitions/Hydro/en/rivers/columbia.php?id=37 many nice pictures  http://www.bpa.gov/power/pg/columbia_river_inside_story.pdf power dam systems  http://www.columbiariverman.com/Page6/wst_page6.html historical sites  The stories and sightings of Ogopogo are well recorded, a long time back in history. Like Loch Ness, there are few good documented sightings. I, myself, have not seen the Ogopogo, yet. But I have spent a fair amount of time fishing and travelling the shores of the great Okanagan Lake system, and will not be surprised when I see one; rather more surprised if I don't.  I have seen many other sight, some that can be mistaken for anything; at distance or morning fog. Like Trumpeter Swans,  http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nmWtC0a6mpY nice film  these large beautiful birds are often in the lake system in late winter, as they migrate south for open water, as the lakes freeze in the north. When the feed, they graze on under water roots for many minutes, and when then their long neck and head comes up, they are just like a Ogopogo look a like.  Another likely Ogopogo look a like is the sturgeon, a fish that can be over one hundred years, may be much more, and over 2.200 lb's, may be more. We don't know how and where they mate, but if a few of these were to play in the surface, and try to mate, it would be a spectacle, much like a Ogopogo sighting. The waves they could create, would carry for miles.  http://www.env.gov.bc.ca/wld/fishhabitats/sturgeon/index.html  When the first Okanagan Bridge was built between Westbank and Kelowna, there were many divers that worked on the foundation. It was a large job at that time, on a fairly deep and muddy bottom. Some of the divers saw creatures there, on the bottom, that scared them so much, that they quit the job and left the site, on the day; and never dived again. What else could that be; than the real Ogopogo.  A 2.000 lb + sturgeon would look like a shark, a huge shark, but even a diver at that time would know that there where no sharks in this lake system, and that the sturgeons are bottom feeders, no danger at all to man; so what did they see in the muddy water !  http://www.sierraclub.bc.ca/seafood-and-oceans/white-sturgeon-2013-the-real-ancient-mariner the largest cought in Fraser River close to New Westminster was 2.200 lbs.  http://www.bcadventure.com/adventure/angling/game_fish/sturgeon.phtml  over 20 feet and 200 lbs of caviar – how much did I pay for a small tin of caviar ? enough to show a black spot on
Paraphimosis is a condition that only affects uncircumcised males. It develops when the foreskin can no longer be pulled forward over the tip of the penis. This causes the foreskin to become swollen and stuck, which may slow or stop the flow of blood to the tip of the penis. Jan 11, 2016
The Spain international took a tour of the Etihad Stadium after sealing his summer move - but his question about whether it was always full on matchdays was met with silence  EXTRA TIME   Oh, Nolito. You should really have done your homework.Manchester City gave their new marquee signing a grand tour of the Etihad Stadium but one of his questions was met with an awkward silence.The Spain international remarked that he liked stadiums more when they were full and that they looked sad when they are empty.But then he asked: "It's always full I take it, right?"The question was met with silence before the striker quickly followed up with a question about the stadium's capacity.Thankfully for City, Nolito appears none the wiser about the Etihad's 'Emptyhad' nickname.
Photo  Even before the horrific events in Oklahoma last week, Lee Sandlin's "Storm Kings" banished any notion I may have had that it would be a lot of fun to see a tornado up close.  Mr. Sandlin knows how to tell a story, and his gripping narrative, often lyrical and often horrifying, conveys the awesome destructive power of tornadoes as well as their bewildering randomness. (Why this town?)  "A tornado seems to be not a cloud but some sort of inconceivable created structure — one that reaches up from the ground to the heavens as though extending from this world to the next," he writes. "You can't help but see it as essentially supernatural." So it seems fitting that an early figure in this account of more than 300 years of American tornado study was the Puritan preacher Increase Mather, who paused between hellfire sermons to describe a 1690 tornado in Cambridge, Mass.  Much of the book is devoted to biographies of the often cantankerous figures who advanced and occasionally retarded efforts to record, explain and predict tornadoes. These storms have been detected on every continent but Antarctica, Mr. Sandlin notes, and are more common in the American prairie states than anywhere else. (His descriptions of the prairie are particularly evocative.) But the stars of the book are the fearsome clouds themselves — like the 1871 tornado that roared through Peshtigo, Wis., amid the forest fire that created it.  Photo  "It sucked in flames from the surrounding air and drew them up through the funnel so that by the time it reached Peshtigo, it appeared as a gigantic funnel cloud of fire extending up from the burning forests to the sky," Mr. Sandlin writes. "Its heat was so intense that everything around it instantly exploded." A priest who survived the firestorm called the tornado "the finger of God."  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  There was the double tornado that cut through Irving, Kan., in May 1879. Sgt. John P. Finley of the Army Signal Corps, who would push himself to a nervous breakdown by 1882 while recording Midwestern tornadoes, made his first detailed field report on the Irving destruction; it serves as the endpapers of Mr. Sandlin's book. Two decades later, he writes, a struggling entrepreneur named Lyman Baum, who was working on a children's book, came upon a grim detail in a newspaper account of the Irving disaster: "The name of one of the victims, who had been found buried face down in a mud puddle, was Dorothy Gale" — a name the author, writing as L. Frank Baum, would soon immortalize in "The Wonderful Wizard of Oz."
Today, George RR Martin, the famed Game of Thrones author, told Chris Schluep of Omnivoracious his favorite books of 2012.  His #1 choice that was published this year? Tom Reiss's The Black Count. This book is the true story of the real Count of Monte Cristo, Alex Dumas. Alex Dumas is relatively unknown today. However, his story sounds extremely familiar, as his son's (Alexandre Dumas) novels The Count of Monte Cristo and The Three Musketeers were greatly inspired by his father's life.  Martin noted, "I never knew anything about Dumas' father before reading this book. His astonishing adventure-filled life became the inspiration for many of his son Alexander's novels, including a prison stay that inspired The Count of Monte Cristo."  Martin's other favorite books this year (that weren't published in 2012) were Stephen King's 11/22/63 and Susan Orlean's Rin Tin Tin: The Life and the Legend.  This list will give fans something to read before book 6 of the Songs of Ice and Fire series comes out (it'll probably be quite awhile, knowing Martin's slow pace and long-winded writing...it took him SIX years to write A Dance with Dragons, the fifth installment) and before Season 3 of the HBO adaptation resumes on March 31, 2013 (the episodes have been lengthened! Yipee!)  If you need to further your George RR Martin fix, you can also see him read from a portion of the sixth book The Winds of Winter.  Correction: This post formerly stated that A Dance with Dragons was Book 6 of the Songs of Ice and Fire Series. It is Book 5.
Flag of Netherlands. The Dutch flag is composed of a red-white-blue tricolor and it is also known as "The Prince's Flag". Records about the prince William of Orange´s flag appeared already in 1572, when William led the resistance against the Spanish domination, however the flag was originally orange, white and blue.
1 Item Details  2 Roto Points Projected score from RotoGrinders.com  3 NumberFire Projected score from NumberFire.com  4 Spread Spread according to Vegas  5 O/U The over/under according to Vegas  6 Salary FanDuel salary of the player  7 $ Per Point Salary divided by the projected points from RotoGrinders (I trust them more...)  8 OFF vs DEF 50% of the average FanDuel points scored at that position (by team) + 50% of the average FanDuel points allowed vs that position (by team). This is similar to RotoGrinders' OFF vs DEF ---> https://rotogrinders.com/grids/nfl-offense-vs-defense-1406310  9 DEF vs Pos Average FanDuel points allowed vs that position  10 RDZ T&T / GM Total number of "red zone" touches and targets for RB's, WR's, and TE's per game  11 Tou & Tar / GM Total number of rushing attempts and targets for RB's, WR's, and TE's per game  12 Target % Players targets divided by team targets. Written as a percentage.  13 DVOA Diff. Differential between the OFF DVOA & and the DVOA for passing / rushing. This takes into account the position of the player.  14 OFF DVOA OFF DVOA measures a team's offensive efficiency by comparing success on every single play to a league average based on situation and opponent. This stat is categorized as Passing DVOA (QB's, WR's, and TE's) and Rushing DVOA (RB's) and is position specific More can be found here --->  15 DVOA vs Pa. DVOA vs Pa. measures a team's defensive efficiency by comparing success on every single play to a league average based on situation and opponent. This stat is categorized as DVOA versus passing plays. More can be found here --->  16 DVOA vs Rush DVOA vs RUSH measures a team's defensive efficiency by comparing success on every single play to a league average based on situation and opponent. This stat is categorized as DVOA versus rushing plays. More can be found here ---> http://www.footballoutsiders.com/info/methods  17 DVOA vs RB DVOA vs RB measures a team's defensive efficiency by comparing success on every single play to a league average based on situation and opponent. This stat is categorized as DVOA versus RB's More can be found here --->  18 DVOA vs WR1 DVOA vs WR1 measures a team's defensive efficiency by comparing success on every single play to a league average based on situation and opponent. This stat is categorized as DVOA versus #1 WR's More can be found here --->  19 DVOA vs WR2 DVOA vs WR2 measures a team's defensive efficiency by comparing success on every single play to a league average based on situation and opponent. This stat is categorized as DVOA versus #2 WR's More can be found here --->  20 DVOA vs WR3+ DVOA vs WR3+ measures a team's defensive efficiency by comparing success on every single play to a league average based on situation and opponent. This stat is categorized as DVOA versus all other WR's More can be found here --->  21 DVOA vs TE DVOA vs TE measures a team's defensive efficiency by comparing success on every single play to a league average based on situation and opponent. This stat is categorized as DVOA versus TE's More can be found here --->  22  23 Notes: Use the filter funtion under the "Position" column to view a certain position  24 Conditional formatting is by position. For example, the formatting for "OFF vs DEF" will not be the same for QB's and TE's  25  26  27 About this sheet: These sheets are FREE to use to the DFS community. I do maintain them and will be updating the custom formatting each week as numbers change. I will gladly accept donations to keep this project up and running....no more than a few bucks.  28 I hope these sheets make you lots of money! Thanks and enjoy!  29 If you find any errors, let me know. I'm a teacher and do this for fun. I'll fix next chance I get.  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60  61  62  63  64
A A  In another example of reversing recent decisions by the Clark County council, the expanded board voted on Tuesday to undo a 2 percent reduction in the county's property tax levy approved last month.  By a vote of 3 to 2, the council voted to reset the county's general fund tax levy to a zero-percent change over the taxes collected in 2015, except for what revenue is naturally added through new construction. Councilors Jeanne Stewart, a Republican, Julie Olson, a Republican, and Chairman Marc Boldt, who has no party preference, voted to undo the tax reduction. Councilors David Madore, the Republican who proposed the tax cut in the first place, and Tom Mielke, also a Republican, voted to maintain the 2 percent cut approved on Dec. 1.  "I'd rather preserve funding for financial stability, for the sheriff's department, for the parks and for the obligations we made in the budget when it was adopted than to go forward with what looks to me like a campaign slogan," Olson said.  The decision means the county will bring in about $59.4 million in 2016, as opposed to the $58.3 million the county would have brought in under the 2 percent cut, according to a presentation from budget staff. County budget staff projected that the 2 percent cut would have reduced the county's reserve fund balance to about $21.9 million by the end of 2016, below the $23 million county policy requires to remain in the coffers for emergencies and cash flow.  The actions mark the second time in as many weeks that the Clark County council, which this year expanded from three members to five, voted to overturn actions Madore and Mielke supported last year. At the request of Acting County Manager Mark McCauley, sheriff's deputies provided extra security in the hearing room, where a packed audience of both critics and supporters of the tax cut cheered and shouted throughout the meeting.  Madore, visibly angered by the decision, said the action showed the board is being governed by "a new liberal majority."  "What we're seeing here is dysfunction," Madore said.  Questions of legality  But debate on whether or not to change the tax levy became a secondary issue after Madore said his fellow councilors would knowingly violate state laws governing public hearings if they moved ahead to a vote.  Tuesday's action, by state law, should have been handled in a public hearing because it regarded tax revenue, Madore said. No notice of the meeting was given in the county's paper of record, The Reflector, and instead was listed as a "public meeting," rather than a hearing, on the county's website.  "This is a case of unlawfulness," Madore said.  Tuesday's decision comes just days before the county's Friday deadline to forward the tax rolls to the Clark County Treasurer's Office. No changes could be made to the levy certification past Friday.  But Deputy Prosecutor Chris Horne offered a conflicting interpretation of the law, saying that while budgets do need to be considered in noticed public hearings, Tuesday's discussion centered on a separate matter: the county's tax levy certification. Nowhere does state law require that tax levy certifications be handled in a public hearing, Horne said.  "This board already held its public hearing on the budget," he said. "There's no changing of the budget."  The budget the council approved in December did not include any changes or cuts as a result of the tax decrease, and those changes wouldn't have been made until the spring supplemental budget, the budget office said last month.  Both Horne and Madore also said they reached out for advice from the state Department of Revenue, and Madore said he contacted the Municipal Research and Services Center, a nonprofit research group analyzing local governments.  Madore said both organizations told him the meeting would require a public hearing, then backed away from that assessment once the council learned of Horne's input, while Horne said the Department of Revenue confirmed that state law doesn't require a public hearing for certifying levies.  But while an official from the Department of Revenue confirmed that the office spoke to both Horne and Madore, and an official from MRSC also said he spoke to Madore, neither office offered a legal interpretation on whether levy certifications require a public hearing. Both said they referred the matter to Clark County's legal staff — in this case, Horne.  Mielke agreed with Madore, saying he too believed Tuesday's hearing to be illegal, but Olson, Stewart and Boldt all deferred to Horne's interpretation.  "With all due respect, I would rather trust our prosecuting attorney's office with the interpretation of the laws … as he's explained for us today," Olson said.  Where the matter goes from here — and whether Madore goes further to combat what he called the "act of malfeasance" by his fellow councilors — remains to
SANAA (Reuters) - Two years of war may deprive a generation of Yemeni children of an education, the U.N. warned this month, putting them at greater risk of being married off or recruited as child soldiers for a conflict which has killed at least 10,000 people.  Months of unpaid salaries have affected over three-quarters of the impoverished country's teachers, meaning up to 4.5 million children may not finish the school year, UNICEF Representative in Yemen Mertixell Relano told a press conference in the capital Sanaa.  "At the moment we have more than 166,000 teachers in the country that have not received a salary since October last year. This is more or less 73 percent of the total number of teachers in the country," Relano said.  "Those children that are not in school, they are at risk of being recruited (for military service), or the girls might be at risk of being married earlier," she added.  The crisis largely began last year when the internationally-recognized government shifted Yemen's central bank out of Sanaa, which is controlled by the armed Houthi movement with which it is at war.  The government says the Houthis looted the bank and that it is trying to make all payments despite what it calls Houthi obstruction of the transfers - charges the group denies.  Seven months of salaries remain in arrears, public sector employees in Houthi-controlled northern lands say, making travel to work and paying for basic necessities more difficult.  "Money is the backbone of life," lamented Hoda Al Khoulani, a teacher at a children's school in Sanaa.  Without it, I don't think anyone can live and there will be suffering. We're almost begging."
The original tornado-proof structure (seen here) had an irregular shape. The new design is a perfect square and sits flat on the ground. The house is lowered into the ground by a hydraulic arm. 10 Design  Hong Kong-based architecture firm 10 Design is attempting to prove that it is possible to build a tornado-proof home. It will be small, expensive, and made of concrete, but that's a small price to pay when compared to the cost of rebuilding after disasters or preventing loss of life.  More tornadoes occur in the United States than any other part of the world. Tornadoes don't cause near as much damage as a single earthquake or hurricane — partly because they tend to occur in areas of low population — but they do occur more frequently than other natural disasters. In August 2008, FEMA reported that tornadoes had resulted in insured losses of more than $1 billion and "caused an average of 57% of all U.S. insured catastrophic losses" since 1953.  Out of the 1,200 tornadoes that strike the nation on average each year, the majority touch down in "Tornado Alley." This region spans the Midwest and the South, including Nebraska, Kansas, Oklahoma, and northern Texas.  "There's nothing accidental about a tornado in the Midwest," said Ted Givens, a design partner at 10 Design. He's designed a house that lowers into the ground, out of harm's way from a deadly storm.  The latest prototype is a simple box with two bedrooms. The 900-square-foot home, which competes with the size of many New York City apartments, has concrete walls and a roof that is part concrete, part glass so that light can shine in even when the house slides into the earth.  Four hydraulic lifts in each corner of the house make it go up and down. In good weather, the house sits level on the ground. When the wind speeds pick up, indicating a tornado is on the way, the home will retract 10 feet below the surface into an underground bunker that has 400 square of additional space for storage and a farm to produce food.  Initially, the home had an irregular structure and was raised off the ground by an arm. The conventional box-shaped house "will be more approachable," Givens said of the new design."It's like an ancient courtyard house and in-ground pool."  The 900-square-foot house disappears into an underground bunker with 400 additional square feet of space. 10 Design In the event of a power outage, homeowners "can release the hydraulic fluid and [the lifts] will collapse," says Givens. Underground backup generators will keep electricity flowing to the subterranean shelter even when power lines are down. The house will also have multiple emergency hatches so dwellers can escape should one of the lifts fail, or the roof is blocked by debris.  The company just locked down a site in Utica, Kan., to build the first prototype. The property is owned by Darren McBee, who contacted Givens after reading about the disaster-resistant house on "The Weather Channel" in June.  This is the "hot spot of the hot spot," Givens said.  McBee, 50, can remember three very serious tornadoes that whacked the region in his lifetime. In 2008, a major storm ripped the roof off of a garage he had been working on for his tractors and cars. McBee had insurance, but it caused him a great deal of aggravation.  "It's like being violated," he told Business Insider over the phone. "It's upsetting. I don't know that you can put a price figure on that. It's just an inconvenience and a lot of headaches."  McBee has no reservations about living in a small, concrete house or temporarily being plunged underground at the first sign of a tornado.  "It's going to be different," he said, "but hopefully it will bring a lot of attention back to western Kansas."  There are obvious limitations to building an "indestructible" home. For starters, the plumbing will be complicated because the pipes would need to flex as the house moves. And because the house is a made of concrete, heating and cooling will also be harder to regulate.  Givens estimates the cost of the prototype house to be somewhere between $300,000 and $500,000, but expects that figure to drop once it becomes commercially viable.  "We won't know a lot of things until we build it and test it," said Givens.  He'll get that opportunity at the start of next year, when they are hoping to begin construction on the Kansas prototype.
There is only one story in town in Wednesday's newspapers as the Scottish government's White Paper on independence dominates the Scottish press.  Pictures of First Minister Alex Salmond and Deputy First Minister Nicola Sturgeon holding the blueprint - actually, it's more of a book - graced many of the front pages, while others went down the cartoon route.  The Scotsman  A full-page Saltire on the front page launched 12 pages of coverage, colour and analysis in the Scotsman. Former SNP candidate George Kerevan called the White Paper "the first fully comprehensive manifesto for political change seen in the UK since, arguable, the Beveridge report". And he praised it for offering a "more rounded vision of a new Scotland". Elsewhere, former Labour MP Brian Wilson questioned the substance of the document, writing "there is much in this White Paper that it is possible to split peas through". But Mr Wilson added that the "one good thing to be said for it is that the target now exists". The paper's leader argued that many questions about independence remained unanswered, but said the document was a "gauntlet laid down to the parties in the Better Together campaign", and urged UK ministers to be more forthcoming with their plans for Scotland if it stays in the UK.  The Herald  The Herald's largely upbeat coverage in both the main paper and a eight-page pull-out will likely provide some cheer for the SNP. The paper's leader said the White Paper had gone some way to "filling the vision vacuum that has thus far dogged the campaign". Elsewhere, Iain Macwhirter said he didn't believe the White Paper would convert many people to independence, but praised it for presenting an "eloquent challenge to the unionist parties". Analysing how the document might affect voter intentions, Professor John Curtice argued that the consequences are uncertain for the SNP, since "neither the UK government nor the EU seem inclined to indicate they will be willing to play ball".  The Sun  In signature style, the Scottish Sun went for a humorous front page, casting Alex Salmond as Michael J Fox looking at his watch with the headline "Eck to the Future", in a retro mock-up of the film poster for Back to the Future. Inside, the coverage was even-handed, and featured articles written by both Alex Salmond and pro-Union Better Together's leader, Alistair Darling. Elsewhere, the paper asked a large group of readers and celebrities for their views on the independence blueprint.  The Daily Record  The Daily Record, which supports the Better Together Campaign, ran "Forget about the price tag?" as its front page headline. The paper's Westminster editor Torcuil Crichton cast Mr Salmond in a biblical light, and said Alex Salmond's "new and old testament" was promising to "move mountains". But he concluded: "If there were contradictions in his theology of independence, the first minister could not hear them." Elsewhere in the paper, columnist Joan McAlpine, an SNP MSP, asked readers: "Do you trust David Cameron and George Osborne, whose economic policies have done less than zero for ordinary people?"  The Times  The headline on the front page of The Times, which featured a picture of the First Minister with his eyes closed, said the White Paper signalled a "bitter UK split". On the opinion pages, Alex Massie called it the "biggest, best, most wide-ranging prospectus yet placed before the Scottish people." He said the challenge now for the SNP was to change the question from "why" to "why not". Elsewhere, an underwhelmed Magnus Linklater said the launch was "intended as an appeal to the head rather than the heart. But somehow, one felt, the heart wasn't in it."  The Daily Mail  The paper's Scottish edition featured a cartoon of Alex Salmond in full Braveheart regalia, with the headline "The Great Pretender". The paper, which is staunchly pro-Union, gave six news pages to coverage of the white paper, and highlighted the financial "costs" of independence, while columnist Jonathan Brocklebank described yesterday's launch as the "grounds for divorce". Elsewhere, the paper's Mac cartoon depicts two elderly ladies speaking with a Church of Scotland minister: "We canna make up oor minds. God promises heaven on Earth, but so does Alex Salmond."  The Press and Journal  While the front page of the paper highlighted an oil-related story - "Salmond vows: No more oil tax raids" - as part of its coverage, this bastion of life in the north east of Scotland focused on the role that Lossiemouth would play in the plans for an independent Scotland's defence force.
A dharma talk given by Thich Nhat Hanh on November 12, 2009 at New Hamlet, Plum Village. In this short talk Thay explores taking refuge in the Three Jewels and being an island unto oneself.  Being an island unto myself  As an island unto myself  Buddha is my mindfulness  Shining near, shining far  Dharma is my breathing  Guarding body and mind  I am free  Sangha is my five skandhas  Working in harmony  Taking refuge in myself  Coming back to myself  I am free
Glenn Beck warned listeners on his radio show today that too many crises are piling up all at the same time which will cause the press to finally turn on President Obama. In Beck's fragile mind, that will cause Obama to snap, then of course the President will start rounding up conservatives to put them into camps.  If only. This is pretty much the same thing that gun lobbyist Larry Pratt and Conspiracy theorist Alex Jones said today.  Right Wing Watch reports:  Just as German society demonized Jews for years before the Nazis took power, Beck warned that this nation "has been watering some seeds" for nearly ten years to condition Americans to accept that "there are those enemies of the president that need to be punished." Once the press turns on Obama, Beck warned, he "is not going to react well" because he has been coddled his entire life and was always treated like a god who was never to be criticized or questioned. Saying that Obama is like a spoiled child who is about to be told that he doesn't get a trophy just for participating, Beck predicted that Obama would respond by lashing out furiously at conservatives and putting them into internment camps. "If you couple that [sense of entitlement]with power," he stated, "you're in trouble."  Watch:  Click here for reuse options!
From Detective Conan Wiki  Magic Kaito Volume 1 was released on May 15, 1988 in Japan.  edit] The Revived Phantom Thief  edit] Characters introduced  edit] Gadgets introduced  Card Gun Kid's gun that shoots cards  edit] Heist info  Eye of the Moon A jewel worth 400 million yen  edit] Chapter 1  It's just another average day in Ekoda High School Class 2-B as childhood friends Kaito Kuroba and Aoko Nakamori chase each other around the classroom after Kaito peeks at Aoko's underwear. Kaito seems pleased with himself until Aoko says that even Kaito couldn't beat Kaitou Kid, a thief known for using magic. Kaito takes Aoko up on this challenge and says he'll catch Kaitou Kid himself and disappears from the classroom. Meanwhile, Aoko's father, Inspector Ginzo Nakamori sees a news report that Kaitou Kid plans on stealing a gem called the Eye of the Moon.  Sitting in his room after school Kaito sees the news report on TV as well. Hearing that Kaitou Kid has reappeared after he suddenly vanished eight years ago reminds Kaito of his father, the famous magician Toichi Kuroba, who passed away eight years ago in a stage accident. While thinking about Toichi, Kaito puts his hand on the portrait of his father hanging in his bedroom and suddenly falls through the wall as the painting flips around. Kaito finds himself in a hidden room and a recorded message on a tape recorder left behind by his father. Unfortunately the tape is old and breaks but then Kaito discovers an unusual outfit. At the same time, Aoko is visiting the Kuroba household and speaks with Kaito's mother Chikage Kuroba in an effort to find out Kaito's weakness. Curious about his father, Kaito puts on the white cape and hat and decides he'll go to the Kid heist to meet him and get some answers.  Kaitou Kid successfully steals the Eye of the Moon and works on making his escape only to encounter Kaito dressed in a similar outfit on the roof. Kaitou Kid is surprised and tries to fool Kaito with a magic trick. Using the trick he used on Aoko earlier and his card gun, Kaito successfully unmasks Kaitou Kid and reveals Kid's trick of using mirrors on his body to seemingly make his body disappear. The unmasked Kid falls to the ground in shock and in tears calls Kaito by his father's name. The man named Konosuke Jii who was an attendant of Toichi's reveals his plan to wear the Kaitou Kid outfit in an effort to lure out Toichi's murderers. Alarmed, Kaito asks Jii about Toichi's death and whether or not Toichi was Kaitou Kid. Jii tells Kaito the truth just as the police manage to make their way to the rooftop. Kaito decides to act as bait to allow Jii to escape and declares himself as Kaitou Kid. The next day at school, Kaito is looking at the Eye of the Moon in his hand when Aoko suddenly appears with what Kaito's mother has revealed to be Kaito's weakness: fish. Frightened, Kaito accidentally drops the Eye of the Moon in the fish's mouth and then begins shooting at the fish with his card gun. Aoko yells at Kaito to knock it off and asks him if he knows how much the fish is worth. Kaito surprises Aoko by telling her "400 million yen". Later that night Inspector Nakamori discovers the Eye of the Moon in the fish his daughter brought home for dinner.  edit] The Police Are Everywhere  edit] Heist info  Beaucoup de Soleil à Paris (Lots of Sunshine in Paris) Europe's largest diamond  Currently belongs to Princess Anne  edit] Chapter 2  Princess Anne arrives in one of Japan's airports, bringing along several national treasures, including Europe's largest diamond, "Lots of Sunshine over Paris". Her siamese kitten and constant companion, Belmonde, runs off, only to pinned by several bullets shot by Europe's top detective, Delon. Delon has a reputation for being ruthless and deadly, shooting criminals that try to run. Inspector Nakamori, who is part of Princess Anne's police guard while she's in Japan, arrives intent on finding the shooter, only to be put down by Delon for allowing Kaitou Kid to escape so many times. Delon issues a challenge to Kid to come after the diamond.  In class the next day, Kaito reads an article about the challenge and temporarily disrupts math class with his enraged reaction. Aoko thinks he's looking at Princess Anne's picture rather than the challenge, and he teases her for being jealous. She denies it, claiming she's worried for Nakamori, who thinks he might be removed from
Amos Dudley An undergraduate at New Jersey Institute of Technology made his own plastic braces using a 3D printer, $60 of materials, and a healthy dose of ingenuity — and they actually worked.  Amos Dudley had braces in middle school, but he didn't wear a retainer like he was supposed to, so his teeth slowly shifted back.  He didn't want to shell out thousands of dollars for a whole new round of braces, so the digital-design major decided to make his own.  On his blog, Dudley writes that he was an unlikely combination of two things: He was broke, but had access to a high-quality 3D printer through his university. He took full advantage of this.  The process wasn't exactly easy. He had to research orthodontic procedures and plot the route of his successive braces, so his teeth would move in the right way. But once that was done, all it took was fabricating a series of models out of relatively inexpensive plastic, and then following through on wearing them.  And it was worth it for Dudley, whose smile turned out looking remarkable.  Here is the process he went through:
President Trump's news conference on Aug. 15. (David Jorgenson/The Washington Post)  Tucker Carlson is a perfect complement to President Trump. The Fox News host is intellectual, polished and composed, while the president is emotional, coarse and volatile.  Remember "Luther," Barack Obama's anger translator, played by Keegan-Michael Key? Carlson plays the opposite role for Trump. He makes Trump's views more palatable for viewers who want to agree with their Republican president but are sometimes put off by the delivery. Carlson also happens to host the top-rated show in cable news, becoming the new king of the genre since Bill O'Reilly's ouster.  Carlson was in peak form Tuesday after Trump held an impromptu news conference in which he again suggested that white supremacists and the counterprotesters who opposed them were equally responsible for violence in Charlottesville over the weekend.  Trump defended participants in a "Unite the Right" demonstration against the removal of a confederate statue. He conceded that "it looked like they had some rough, bad people — neo-Nazis, white nationalists, whatever you want to call them" but asserted that "you had a lot of people in that group that were there to innocently protest."  Sure — to innocently march alongside neo-Nazis.  That is a tough position to back, but Carlson shifted viewers' focus away from the president's sympathy for a group full of racists and directed it elsewhere. He blamed the media for the political fallout over Trump's comments. He also rebuked liberal activists, whom he accused of stoking violence and shutting down free speech, and painted them as the "alt-left," a term popularized on Fox News, most notably by Sean Hannity.  "One thing the president said today deserves more attention than it will likely get," Carlson said at the top of his opening monologue. "Yesterday a mob tore down a Civil War soldier's memorial in Durham, North Carolina. Police stood idly by, and liberals across the country applauded it. Which statues are next, the president asked today: George Washington? Thomas Jefferson? It's not a joke. Suddenly it's a serious question."  There are scattered examples of calls to take down monuments to slave-owning Founding Fathers — Carlson went on to cite a few — but there is no evidence of widespread momentum for such changes.  Yet to hear Carlson tell it, American history itself is under attack, and so is the First Amendment. We broke down his show in greater detail, in the video above — an annotation of sorts.  Below is a look at how Trump's talking points on Charlottesville align with Fox News's, more broadly.
How even the most unlikely teams can make the College Football Playoff Duke in the College Football Playoff? The computer says it can happen. So what other wacky playoff teams exist?  Inside Harvard Football - Episode 3 - Via Ivy League Go behind-the-scenes with Harvard Football as the Crimson prepare for a Friday night contest vs. URI.  CFB bettor's team insights: Week 5 Will Harris put his ear to the ground to collect some valuable betting information from the college football practice fields.  Pollack: Loser of Penn State-Ohio State not necessarily out of Playoff David Pollack previews the monster matchup between Ohio State and Penn State and what each team needs to do to win.  Turnover chain off the hook vs. Tar Heels The Miami Hurricanes defense was lockdown against UNC, recording six turnovers and three touchdowns in the 47-10 rout.
The story of Korean history's most astonishing military victory by its greatly revered strategist, Admiral Yi Sunshin, who lures over 300 Japanese ships into a deadly trap where they meet their fate against only 13 battle ships. (c) CJ Entertainment
The Jazz were fairly quiet in free agency over the summer, reaching new deals with their own free agents like Derrick Favors, Dante Exum, and Raul Neto, but not bringing in any outside targets. However,
Roots-music legend, and three-time Grammy Award winner Lucinda Williams is set to release her first-ever double album "Down Where The Spirit Meets The Bone" on September 30 though her very own Highway 20 Records  "Down Where The Spirit Meets The Bone" is said to be " Williams' most ambitious and adventurous projects to date." It features 20 new songs, with 18 written by Williams. The album's opening track, "Compassion", was originally a poem by her father, the poet Miller Williams, in which she wrote the music and additional lyrics.  From the press release "This is a personal milestone for Williams as it marks the first time she has composed music for one of her father's poems, and it is from that song that the album title was taken. "  The album also features a cover os JJ Cale's "Magnolia."  "Down Where The Spirit Meets The Bone" features performances by guitarists Bill Frisell and Tony Joe White, Faces keyboardist Ian McLagan, Elvis Costello's rhythm section of Pete Thomas (drums) and Davey Faragaher (bass) and Wallflowers guitarist Stuart Mathis. Jakob Dylan adds harmony vocals on "It's Gonna Rain." Williams' longtime rhythm section of Butch Norton (drums) and David Sutton (bass) make also contribute. D"Down Where The Spirit Meets The Bone" was produced by Williams, Tom Overby and Greg Leisz.  Of the Album Williams says " "I didn't set out to do a whole album of country-soul, but once I started working, a stylistic thread kind of emerged," she says. "It's a sound I can relate to, one that's really immediate and really timeless at the same time — kind of sad in an indefinable way. It's like something my dad said to me many years ago, something I wrote down and included in my song "Temporary Nature (Of Any Precious Thing)" because it was so profound to me — 'the saddest joys are the richest ones.' I think that fits this album really well."  EDIT: Here is the front and back covers. (The back is for the vinyl version.) The photos are by Birney Imes from his book "Juke Joint". It is the same book that provided the cover for "Car Wheels On A Gravel Road", as well as the photo that inspired the song "2 Kool 2 Be Forgotten"  See Williams perform "Something Wicked This Way Comes" from "Down Where The Spirit Meets The Bone"
This week we listened to Waking Up with Sam Harris and as big fans we were very disappointed in how he handled his interview with Jordan B. Peterson. So in this episode Thomas goes over exactly why that is, in the hopes that this message reaches Sam.  We also have some more great listener voicemails, thank you so much for all the great feedback and keep it coming!  Find the record of Bill C-16 from the Canadian Parliament here  Find the Ontario Provisions Peterson mentioned here  Find Brenda Cossman's article rebutting Peterson's Claims here  Some even argue that C-16 doesn't go far enough! here  And VICE has a pretty good breakdown of everything here  Leave us a Voicemail: (916) 750-4746!  Support us on Patreon at: patreon.com/seriouspod  Follow us on Twitter: @seriouspod  Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/seriouspod  For comments, email thomas@seriouspod.com  Questions, Suggestions, Episode ideas? email: haeley@seriouspod.com   Direct Download
RWW's Paranoia-Rama takes a look at five of the week's most absurd conspiracy theories from the Right.  Conservative pundits are downright furious about the Federal Communications Commission's decision to preserve net neutrality, ensuring that internet service providers treat all data equally. But their anger seems driven more by reflexive hostility to any proposal that President Obama supports rather than an understanding of the principle behind net neutrality. In fact, right-wing commentators have spent the week making dire warnings about net neutrality that have no basis in reality.  We took a look at five of the wildest attacks on net neutrality in a special edition of Paranoia-Rama:  5) Socialism!  Pat Robertson knows a lot about the dangers of the internet and the satanic covens who use it to dish out curses on unsuspecting people, and the televangelist is very troubled by net neutrality. He warned that the "Obama people" are using net neutrality to advance a "socialist agenda" to "take control of everything" and "ruin the internet."  Robertson described net neutrality as an attack on freedom, warning that the FCC's vote is another sign that "our liberties are being eroded every single day."  "I don't want to live under a dictatorship," he said.  4) Guns!  Yes, on the Thursday edition of his radio program, Rush Limbaugh somehow managed to link net neutrality to the supposed attacks on gun rights coming from the Obama administration.  "Barack Obama is taking over the internet today," Limbaugh said, warning that "the objective is to put it all under the control of government."  Limbaugh suggested that the administration will use the recent arrest of ISIS sympathizers in New York to make the case that "the government must have control of the internet if we are to be safe." This so-called "government takeover" of the internet, he said, will aid Democrats in their plan to start "banning bullets" under the guise of "making you safe and secure."  3) Corporations!  Glenn Beck believes that support for strong net neutrality rules means that America deserves to be destroyed, and anyone who disagrees with his opposition to the new rules, according to Beck, is a "moron."  Of course, this stunning assessment comes from the same media personality who actually seems to support the principle behind net neutrality even if he doesn't realize it.  2) Comcast!  Like Beck, Sandy Rios and Rick Manning seem to think that huge internet service providers are the ones pushing net neutrality.  The two conservative activists suggested that Comcast was among the firms to blame for the FCC's decision to approval new net neutrality rules, despite the fact that the company is one of the biggest opponents of net neutrality.  1) Freedom!  CPAC speakers love boasting about their love of guns, Ronald Reagan and freedom. As Sen. Mike Lee, R-Utah, explained when he kicked off the conference, "We have a job to do, and that job is not just to find the guy who can shout 'freedom' the loudest."  But very few participants followed his advice, regularly speaking about freedom in broad platitudes rather than laying out specific views (see: Walker, Scott).  After telling CPAC attendees that they can help save America by joining his effort to "reassemble the Reagan coalition," Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Tex., said that he will create such a coalition, in part, by opposing net neutrality.  "Washington wants power over the internet," Cruz said, while "the people want freedom online."  Cruz then rallied the crowd by using a line similar to an equally inane tweet comparing net neutrality to Obamacare: "Don't believe President Obama when he says, 'If you like your internet, you can keep your internet'!"
Grab your wallets and purses, politicians want more of your money.  Both houses of the Illinois General Assembly, in an attempt to curb illegal gambling (and increase tax revenue) created a law that put poker runs under the control of the Department of Revenue. Now every motorcyclist knows that a poker run is only about gambling, right?  As part of the law there are new regulations, permits and fees. From what I could gather the permit is $400 and each stop (venue) is charged an additional $150. If you don't pay the fees you will be an illegal gambling operation and subject to all the appropriate fines and imprisonments.  If you have ever participated in a poker run you know that they typically support a charity of some sort. You also know that they normally do not raise huge sums of money and if it rains they might even go in a hole. But, in Illinois I guess that the state is the only real charity that matters.  Luckly, there are a few members of the General Assembly who understand what a poker run really does and are attempting to change the law. So if you live in the People's Republic of Illinois you might want to contact your beloved leaders and let them know your opinion on this subject.  If you live somewhere else, keep an eye on your esteemed politicians, if it works in Illinois it might becoming to your state soon.
Toaru Kaki no Campaign (とある夏期の限定企画(キャンペーン), Toaru Kaki no Gentei Kikaku?), translated as "A Certain Summer Campaign" was a large promotional event that occurred near the end of August 2013, coinciding with several marketing events for the Toaru Majutsu no Index franchise.  Contents show]  Background Edit  To celebrate the publication of Shinyaku Toaru Majutsu no Index 8 (9/10 release), and Toaru Kagaku no Railgun 9 (8/27 release), the A Certain Summer Campaign will begin! There will be an event where fans of the Toaru series will get a free trial of the Toaru franchise through "A Certain Summer Magazine", as well as an official character popularity elections. There are a lot of stuff to watch out for!  The site contains promotional ads for various Toaru Majutsu no Index-related merchandise, such as that of the Toaru Kagaku no Accelerator Manga.  Events Edit  Coinciding with this event is the release of a 50-page preview of Shinyaku Toaru Majutsu no Index Light Novel Volume 08 on the Dengeki website.[1]  Toaru Sakuhin no Convention Edit  Toaru Sakuhin no Convention (とある作品の大総選挙(コンベンション), Toaru Sakuhin no Dai Sō Senkyo?) was a character poll that was part of the event, featuring nearly every character in the franchise. Normally, the polls would have been topped by Misaka Mikoto due to her sheer popularity, but upon its opening, 2channel Vippers began influencing the polls, and have made automatic voting programs, voting for things such as Gekota, to even Hino Jinsaku.[1] Jinsaku later becomes the first ranked character upon the 103,000 votes. The prize is for the first ranked character is a Haimura-illustrated message card with messages from Kamachi and the other comic creators[2]  The poll continued on until October 10, and the first rank at that time would get the prize.[2] The winner was eventually Misaka Mikoto.  Final results Edit  Click on the show button to expand table.  103,000 seconds TV ~Magic and Science will save the world~ Edit  It was an event that was done as commemoration for the Index movie Blu-Ray sales, there was a show on Nico-Nico lasting 103,000 seconds (28 hours and 40 minutes). Several voice actors, Kawada Mami and Kurosaki Maon were part of it.[3]  Moreover, a schedule was later released detailing the activities to be done during the event. Here, it was revealed that the event will broadcast selected episodes of Index, Index II, Railgun, and Railgun S, as well as the 22 minute preview of the Toaru Majutsu no Index Movie: Miracle of Endymion. The event also had the main cast.[4]  Gallery Edit  Artwork by Kiyotaka Haimura of Misaka Mikoto, the 1st-ranked character in the poll, signed by Kamachi and other staff.  Add a photo to this gallery
Originally Posted by xyphic (Source) Originally Posted by  If you can't modify the game executable, there'll always be a limit to what you can and can't mod. Where this limit lies depends on what Frontier build into the executable and what they class as assets. The executable is somewhere in the region of 80 MB, which for a modern game is quite small. This strongly implies that the majority of assets (models, audio, etc.) are kept outside of the executable, which you can see is true if you go looking around the game files. Now, with a protected executable, Frontier *could* also lock these assets down by including a hash of the file in the executable and erroring out upon a hash mismatch, but given Andy's response above we can rule this out.   The likelihood is that the majority of assets could at least be *replaced* (i.e. changing textures, models, audio) but I'd be stunned if Frontier hadn't built the game in such a way as to allow new assets to be easily *added* through the same mechanism, even for their own convenience. You don't want your artists to have to rebuild the game every time they add a new building piece or guest model.   What we don't yet know is how much other than assets are kept outside of the executable. Game logic? Flat ride programming? Shaders (e.g. for potentially adding new VFX pieces)? Guest AI? Scenarios? Biome types? Time will tell, because these are the things that the modding community will want to change up.
By Paul Tomkins.  In order to let in some light, let's first study the darkness. The one thing that's undeniably definite in life is also the thing we most stridently ignore: death. We distort reality in order to avoid facing that grim conclusion; facing our grim conclusion. We tell each other that life should be good, and fair, and that we should be happy, but shit happens. If you live a long life you will see a lot of death around you* … and that's what happens if you're lucky.  (*If you're a football commentator, you will see a lot of death "in and around you".)  Perhaps we cling to the myth of immortality – or simply ignore our inevitable demise – just as we cling to the notion that our club should be doing better than it actually is, which is a delusion shared by fans of approximately 92 English league clubs. Even fans of those who are top of the league think things should be going better.  Often when I confront fans with the realistic likelihood of what their club (usually Liverpool) will achieve they accuse me of destroying their hope. But hope can also be the denial of reality. If you want to hope that Liverpool will win the league, feel free to do so. But unless it's 1988 again, you'll probably end up disappointed. And when people get disappointed they lash out, and get depressed, and are irrational. And they never, ever seem to make the connection. Hope is great, in theory, but in practice it's what drives you crazy.  Liverpool have some problems right now, which I will come onto. But much of my work the past few years has been about setting a realistic baseline, against which league performance can be judged. In individual games all kinds of crazy shit can happen, but more often than not the teams with the costliest XIs and the highest wage bills win those matches (maybe 60-70% of the time).  A team costing £1m can beat a team costing £200m, but it will almost certainly never finish above it in the league. This is a basic fact that people seem to misunderstand; the difference between the one-off shock and the 38-game season. On the day, tactics are important. But over the course of the season, player quality and the strength in depth evens things out, smoothing it into the natural order. Occasionally that order can bring about a surprise, but it's usually the same old names in roughly the same old positions at the same old time of year. It never brings about a surprise like a team like Southampton being in the top three come the end of the season. The surprises mostly happen in the first few months of the season, when the sample size is smaller.  Regressing?  I wonder how people can say that Liverpool are regressing when last season wasn't an accurate reflection of the quality of the squad and the strongest XI, but a mixture of outrageous talent (Suarez), super-positive football that at times rode its luck but deserved the rewards, a freakish number of set-piece goals, plus some circumstances in the team's favour (rival clubs in turmoil, lack of hindering cup games, lack of serious injuries to key players, etc.).  You can't take last season as your baseline. It was an outlier.  Liverpool have gone backwards? Or did they simply lose their best player and pick up a goal-killing injury to their other star striker, whose return, many months later, showcased clear rustiness? Was it not also the difficult, but inevitable phasing out of an ageing legend? And then, amongst other setbacks – and just as things were looking up – did we not see the loss of the 19-year-old who broke into the team to become its most exciting player?  If I recall correctly, we were hoping we could finish around 5th at the start of last season. But it all went a bit mental. Like a team that gets promoted to the Premier League "too soon", the problem can be that you aren't as good as one season's data suggests. You outperform the model just once, and then you're cast into a situation beyond your abilities and experience. You're in too deep, and you flap about.  Negativity  A few weeks ago I talked about negativity bias, and how an equally good and an equally bad event would result in the bad event feeling five times worse than the good. I pondered, after Liverpool won nine or ten games virtually in succession, if just two defeats would put the mood back down to where it was before the great run. Does two bad defeats cancel out ten good wins? Well, you can answer this for yourselves.  When Liverpool were winning lots of games I still felt the Reds were likely to finish 5th (I voted so in a poll on this site). Once you've gone on a great run of 12 or 13 games, defeat has to be lurking
If I was given the ability to select one man in the history of any sport and put him into that sport's Hall of Fame, I wouldn't choose Pete Rose, Dennis Rodman or Don Mattingly—heck, not even Jerry Kramer.  I would pick Donald Driver. No man in the history of sports stands for what an athlete should be more than him.  The story of this man is a fascinating one. It's also one that few people know.  Driver grew up in the slums. The kid was dirt poor. He lived out of the trunk of his car.  When he was in seventh grade, his older brother noticed Driver's incredible speed, agility and hands—so he put it to use.  Things were so bad for the Drivers that Donald, dubbed "Quickie" by his brothers, was using his God-given talents to steal cars.  Those cars he would sell for drugs, drugs he claims he never used, but rather resold for more money.  Hey, when things are bad, they're bad. Driver says he probably stole 20 or 30 cars, and he was only caught once.  But that once changed everything.  Just as he was starting the car, he heard sirens, so he did what anybody would do—stepped on the gas and got away as fast as possible.  However, just as he was making his escape, he hit an old woman's car as she was backing out of her driveway. He hopped out of the car and sprinted away, and he was in the clear.  He had the cops beat by a few blocks, but something made him turn back.  It was the old lady. He went back to make sure she was okay.  That's right. Driver, who was in the midst of literally running for his life, the same kid who had just been caught stealing a car, turned back to check on the well-being of a woman that he had no affiliation with whatsoever, a woman he had never met in his life.  She was fine, but by the time he got back the police were rounding the corner, so she said to him, "Go sit on my porch."  For some reason he trusted her, and he took a seat on her porch.  By the time the cops got there she told them the lowlife had run off. "So who's that sitting on your porch?" one cop said to her.  The five words that followed would go on to change Driver's life as he knew it: "Oh, that's just my grandson."  Donald was mesmerized. He couldn't believe what had just happened—until the woman walked over to him and said, "Get in this house!" Inside, she went off on him. "Why do you do this?!" she said.  Now, this is no movie. He still stole another car or two because things were that bad. But one year later his mom sent him to live with his grandmother.  He joined the drill team at his grandmother's church and played organized football for the first time at Milby High School, where he found out Olympic speed and great hands can do more than just steal cars.  It then occurred to him what the lady was trying to tell him that day: "You could be doing so much more!"  And he did. Driver starred in track and football at Alcorn State, where he also got his accounting degree.  Isn't it funny how one good deed can mean so much?  After he finished college, Driver had a choice to make: He could either compete in the 2000 Sydney Olympics or join the Green Bay Packers, who had used the 213th overall pick to draft him in 1999.  With his family still in poverty, Driver needed an NFL paycheck desperately, so he chose the Packers.  Good choice.  For two years Driver played every practice as if he would have been arrested for taking a play off, and in 2002, when the Packers were about as desperate for a wide receiver as Driver himself was for money as a kid, guess who came out of nowhere to become a Pro Bowl receiver?  You guessed it: Donald Driver.  Driver didn't disappear after that 2002 season either. The guy has become a Packers legend, the second greatest receiver in team history.  However, talking to Driver, you wouldn't know it. He's never been a "look at me"-type guy, which is why he's flown so wildly under the radar in the same era as guys like Terrell Owens and Randy Moss.  From 2005 to 2008 he was, aside from Marvin Harrison, perhaps the best and most consistent wide receiver in all of football.  Driver holds Packers franchise records for career receiving yards, receptions, 1,000-yard receiving seasons, consecutive games with a reception and 50-plus-catch seasons.  
+ What the differences are between the web and iOS/Android mobile versions?  The iOS and Android versions are native apps, they do not require any streaming and hence can be used anywhere any time. All the videos will be downloaded to your mobile devices.  The webapp is streaming data, since videos are small, they stream just about instantly as long as you are in wifi/data network zone. Since it streams, it uses no memory and is available on all of your devices, since it is browser based!  See comparison chart for detailed breakdown.  + Can I use the web app version on my smartphone or tablet?  Yes, you can! As part of the PhysioU web app, which you can access on any device with a browser (saves on your memory usage since there are so many videos). Follow the step-by-step instructions to get PhysioU on your mobile device.  Our team of experts has made a commitment to providing up to date evidence in an ever evolving clinical environment. Choosing this digital format allows for us to make changes instantaneously via updates which are free to our users. This makes us faster, more clinically relevant and more affordable for our users. Pay once, learn for a lifetime.  + I am interested to purchase, but I have more questions about the products. Can I talk to someone?  Thank you for your interest in our products. Our team will be delighted to assist you. Submit your questions and we will get right back to you.
A popular stir-fry combo that can be vegan-friendly as well!  Broccoli and beef may be a popular stir-fry combo among meat-eaters, but that doesn't mean vegans must miss out on this tasty Chinese recipe. Swap out beef for seitan, a vegan meat alternative, and you'll have a delectable vegan Chinese stir-fry that rivals the original recipe.  Broccoli and seitan stir-fry recipe  Serves 4  Ingredients:  2 tablespoons canola oil  4 cups broccoli florets  1 small onion, halved and sliced  3 garlic cloves, minced  2 tablespoons fresh ginger, minced  3 tablespoons tamari or equivalent Bragg's Amino Acids  2 tablespoons brown sugar  1 (16 ounce) package seitan, cut into strips, liquid reserved  1 tablespoon cornstarch  2 tablespoons water  2 cups steamed rice  Green onions, chopped (for garnish)  Sesame seeds (for garnish)  Directions:  Heat oil in a wok or large skillet over medium-high heat. Stir-fry broccoli and onion until broccoli is crisp tender. Add garlic, ginger, tamari or Bragg's and brown sugar. Stir-fry for 1 minute. Add seitan strips and stir-fry for 1 to 2 minutes. Add seitan liquid, cover and steam for 2 minutes. Whisk together cornstarch and water in a small bowl, and stir cornstarch slurry into the stir-fry mixture. Cook until mixture is slightly thickened. Serve hot over rice and garnished with green onions and sesame seeds.  More vegan stir-fry recipes  Stir-Fry vegetable pizza  Butternut squash and pepper stir-fry  Veggie stir-fry with garlic sauce
The CORSAIR Vengeance Pro memory module is designed for DIY professionals and power users seeking the most overclocking potential from their power rig. The Vengeance Pro is built with eight-layer PCB, specially-selected ICs and rigorously tested to exacting standards, ensuring unbeatable stability and reliability in demanding situations. The heat spreader provides superior temperature management and has the aggressive look you want in your gaming rig. Plus, the support for XMP 1.3 profiles makes overclocking as easy as a cake, so both the new and experienced overclockers can enjoy the excitement of pushing performance beyond the limits.  Built for Overclocking  Each Vengeance Pro Series module is built from an eight-layer PCB and highly-screened memory ICs. The efficient heat spreader provides effective cooling to improve overclocking potential.  Designed to Show Off  The heat spreader doesn't just allow Vengeance Pro Series to run better – the aggressive yet refined form factor looks great in showcase systems. The heat spreader is available in multiple colors to let you match your Vengeance Pro Series memory to your system's color scheme.  Performance and Compatibility  Vengeance Pro Series is optimized for performance on the latest 4th generation Intel Core platform. XMP 1.3 profile support makes stable overclocking easy and automatic.
Wendy Carlisle: A class action in the New South Wales Supreme Court will look at whether police have wrongfully arrested and locked up a large number of young people because of a problem with the police computer system.  Tara El-Masri: Every time I was falsely incarcerated it was not ask me a question, it was, 'You're under arrest,' handcuffs straight away.  Wendy Carlisle: The arrests occurred because the police computer was not updating bail information from the courts. The stories that Background Briefing heard in the making of this program have a recurring theme; police harassment and apparent indifference to the impact of these wrongful arrests. And it has left a big group of young people furious and resentful of the police.  Tara El-Masri: I was very, very angry. I'm starving, I'm freezing, I haven't done nothing wrong, they are treating me like I'm a dog. Yes, I'm going to Juniperina, I'm going to get strip-searched, then I'm wasting my whole day the next day because I'm stuck in the court cells until 4 o'clock in the afternoon. So I wasn't incarcerated for just one day, it was literally two.  Wendy Carlisle: Many young people were repeatedly arrested and detained. Some as young as 13 found themselves cuffed and carted off in the middle of the night.  Reginald Simpson: There was at least three or four of them there and I asked could I grab my belongings and they just grabbed my hands and said, 'No, you can wait.'  Wendy Carlisle: Hello, and welcome to Background Briefing, I'm Wendy Carlisle. This week we're following the stories of teens who found themselves inside a police cell for the crime of being young and troublesome and from the wrong side of the tracks. The problems with the police computer system date back at least seven years. In 2010 $55 million was spent trying to fix the software problems which prevented data from the courts being uploaded into the system known as COPS or the Computer Operational Police System. But the problems weren't solved, and senior police would later warn that these problems exposed the force to significant civil claims, and police would be found wanting in the execution of their duty.  At the same time, the New South Wales ombudsman found that in a town in the north of the state, police had unlawfully arrested three Aboriginal youth within two weeks. 30 young people are currently signed up to the class action which was brought by the legal firm Maurice Blackburn and lawyers at the Public Interest Advocacy Centre or PIAC. PIAC's CEO Ed Santow says the real numbers have yet to be uncovered.  Edward Santow: We've got pretty solid information that it's happening to literally or it has happened to literally hundreds of people.  Wendy Carlisle: Those young people in the frame were, for want of a better description, the usual suspects.  Edward Santow: Around a third of the young people involved in the class action identify as Aboriginal, and a really significant proportion of the young people in the class are from non-English-speaking backgrounds. This problem tends not to affect your average middle-class kid.  Wendy Carlisle: Their offences were relatively minor and non-custodial, but because of the publication restrictions under the Children's Criminal Proceedings Act in New South Wales, Background Briefing is not permitted to name the offences that these individuals committed.  Ed Santow says the police response has been entirely out of proportion.  Edward Santow: If you look at the lead applicant in our class action, the original offence that he was charged with was riding on a train without a ticket. Ultimately he was then detained for breach of bail associated with that original offence. Now, you are never going to be detained for any length of time for simply riding on the train without a ticket.  Wendy Carlisle: For fare evasion.  Edward Santow: Yes, exactly. So there's a complete lack of proportion between what the underlying offence was alleged to be and I guess the approach taken by the police in enforcing bail conditions. And that's what we think is totally out of whack.  Wendy Carlisle: One such story is that of 13-year-old Reginald Simpson, an Aboriginal boy from Wagga Wagga in New South Wales. The recording you are about to hear is of Reginald Simpson being interviewed by his lawyers, and he has given his consent for it to be broadcast. In 2007 he went to visit his aunty in Cowra, and one night the police turned up looking for him and he hid under the bed. Police said he wasn't allowed to leave Wagga and that he had breached his bail.  Reginald Simpson: All of a sudden there was a bang at the door and then my A
WASHINGTON — The House voted on Tuesday to extend a law banning firearms that can pass undetected through airport X-ray machines, but left out provisions that law enforcement officials say are necessary to combat the growing threat of guns made with 3-D printers.  The legislation was approved overwhelmingly on a voice vote, meaning House members on both sides of a politically fraught gun-safety issue avoided having their individual votes officially recorded.  The focus now shifts to the Senate, where Democrats will introduce a stricter measure of their own next week, along with the extension the House passed.  But they are expected to act on Monday, the day the law expires. That leaves little time for senators to debate the more controversial aspects of the legislation, which would impose new restrictions on 3-D printed weapons.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Senators who want to go beyond the current law believe the most likely outcome is that they will pass the 10-year extension next week so the law does not lapse and then return to the issue sometime next year, Democratic aides said.
This combination of file photos shows Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump. (Kena Betancur/EPA; Don Emmert/Getty Images)  Not to talk about Donald Trump again, but Donald Trump has an argument he likes to make. To wit:  Respected Morning Consult poll just out. I lead all Republicans and beat Hillary head to head by a wide margin- 45 to 40! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) December 11, 2015  And also:  .@Morning_Joe is so off on Iowa, which I am leading big in new @CNN poll. I will win Iowa. Also, I beat Hillary easily! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) December 11, 2015  And while we're at it:  Establishment flunky @KarlRove is going crazy with the just released CBS poll that has me way ahead. New Fox poll has me beating Hillary. — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) December 10, 2015  Donald Trump would beat Hillary Clinton, Donald Trump says, and Donald Trump should know, because Donald Trump is looking at some polls that show Donald Trump beating Hillary Clinton in a head-to-head contest next November.  Donald Trump is looking at some polls, though. Not all of them. If he were looking at all the live-caller polls, he would see something that looked less like "Donald Trump will beat Hillary Clinton" than "Hillary Clinton will beat Donald Trump."  Real Clear Politics has Clinton as a six-point favorite based on its poll average, which includes the new Post/ABC poll putting Clinton up by five points. If the election were held tomorrow, the saying goes, Trump would very likely lose.  Maybe! Who knows! The election isn't tomorrow and there are so many factors that come into play. Even that graph above doesn't tell us a whole lot. It says that in some polls, Clinton is preferred over Trump -- but in a few she isn't.  Compare that to a similar set of polls looking at Clinton vs. Marco Rubio.  Here, Rubio generally does better, but not always.  There's another layer to this that's important to note: This doesn't tell us anything about who will win next year because we still don't know who's going to win the primaries.  If you showed me those graphs and said, Philip, will our next president be a Democrat or a Republican?, I would say, "How should I know?" I would then look at you with a skeptical look and say, "This doesn't really tell us anything, you realize."  Let's use another example: Polling from the middle of December 2007.  At that point, Gallup did a survey to pit possible Democratic candidates against possible Republican ones. The Democrats did better, across the board, but by between 5 and 18 points, depending on the match-up. It was not very predictive.  But also notice something: They didn't ask about John McCain! McCain at that point was polling fourth in the Real Clear Politics average, behind Giuliani, Huckabee and Romney. So why ask about that nobody, right?  A month later, McCain was in the lead, and Gallup asked about him. This was as he was starting to lock up the race and while the Democrats were still duking it out. McCain beat both Democrats, in part because he had more than 75 percent support from Republicans and Obama and Clinton got 53 and 71 percent of the Democratic vote, respectively. But of course, Obama won easily, thanks to Democrats coalescing around him after the primaries (and, of course, the obliteration of the economy).  So many things come into play in a general election. It is a very good idea to wait and see who the candidates are and how the campaign (and external factors) progress before swearing up and down that you know who will win.  Unless swearing up and down on limited evidence is your thing. In which case, tweet away.
OTTAWA -- Several candidates will soon announce they're running for the NDP leadership, outgoing leader Tom Mulcair said Wednesday.  "I'm expecting, and I'm quite sure, we'll see several candidacies announced right after Christmas," Mulcair said in an interview with Don Martin, host of Power Play.  Two New Democrat MPs have stepped aside from their roles in the party to consider leadership bids. Charlie Angus, who represents Ontario's Timmins-James Bay riding, and Peter Julian, who represents New Westminster-Burnaby in British Columbia, are said to be thinking of running.  So far, there are no candidates in the NDP race, which is set to culminate next September. The Conservative Party will choose its new leader on May 27 and has 14 candidates with another two considering bids.  "Don't forget the party took a long approach to the date, so it's not until next fall. And one of the reasons, and I thought it was a smart one, [is] they wanted to make sure that members had the information on who the new Conservative leader was going to be," Mulcair said.  The outgoing NDP leader says he'll "probably" end 2017 as an MP, despite losing his role at the head of the party.  "I'm going to work it out with the new leader," Mulcair said.  "I haven't come to a definitive decision yet, but I've said all along I'm going to be very open to working with that person... I actually like this opposition stuff, of holding the government to account."
Barbara Weed's son Tom, 18, cut himself off from his family after getting drawn into a controversial online community. She has not seen him since. Kate Hilpern reports  One Wednesday afternoon in May, when Barbara Weed's 18-year-old son, Tom, was right in the middle of his A-levels, he abruptly left home. "Dear Family," said the note he left on the doormat. "I need to take an indefinite amount of time away from the family, so I've moved in with a friend. Please do not contact me. Tom."  He has not been in touch with any of his relatives since. But Tom is not a missing person. His family know roughly where he is. It's just that he won't talk to them and they suspect he never will. "He got hooked in by an online cult," Barbara says. "The website convinces vulnerable people that they should hate their parents and should leave their family."  Even the wording of Tom's letter is from the website. Its founder says, "The letter should buy you six to 12 months before your family come looking for you and that will give you time to get used to living without them."  Barbara did not wait that long. "I tried to respect Tom's wishes and leave him alone, but once I discovered that the website was responsible for Tom leaving, I visited him at a cafe where he was working part-time," she says. She worked out that if she ordered a cup of tea, he would have to listen to her for about a minute. She told him that if he ever wanted to come home, he could. "He just looked at me, shaking his head, as if to say, 'You fool.'" What baffled Barbara was how a website could have such a dramatic effect on an ordinary family and in such a short space of time.  Barbara and her husband already had two sons - Nick, two, and John, four - when their youngest, Tom, was born. "I adored Tom," says Barbara. "Nick was the mischievous one and sometimes I did get cross with him. But I didn't need to get cross with Tom. He was such a joy to be with and had long, serious conversations with everyone. I always thought he would be the last one to leave home - that at 40 he might even still be here, which is ironic."  The boys were so close in age that they all played together. Barbara took them to parks, playgrounds, theatre shows and Alton Towers and, even though money was tight, there were family seaside holidays every year. "When Tom left, John said, 'But we had a great childhood.'"  By the time the boys reached adolescence, family life had become more dispersed. "My sons each had computers in their rooms and we all had such different schedules that family mealtimes didn't happen any more. Also, Tom was vegan and wanted to cook for himself, so I just gave him money to buy food and he just got on with it." By September 2007, his brothers were at university and Tom had found a girlfriend.  "It's as if you wake up one morning when your children are teenagers and you realise that practically the only time you talk to them is when they're going to the fridge," says Barbara. "But then there are moments when they do things, like give you a necklace." The necklace she is wearing was given to her by Tom after a summer holiday.  Tom and his girlfriend, meanwhile, had become increasingly interested in an online community called Freedomain Radio (FDR), which invites discussion around philosophy, politics and personal freedom. Unbeknown to Barbara at that time, a key topic of the site - whose members seem to be mostly in their teens and twenties - is the idea that ultimate personal freedom can be gained by cutting yourself off from any involuntary relationships (ie your family) and entering into completely voluntary ones (ie your new mates online). "I think once you get these corrupt people out of your life you will for sure have enough room for all the new awesome, virtuous friends in the world," said one member to another recently.  For members unsure about such drastic measures, there are podcasts with titles such as "But my parents were really nice!" and there is a chatroom in which members discuss how so many families are unjust. There is also a Sunday call-in show in which the website's founder counsels callers. Often the subject is leaving your family.  Barbara recalls Tom and his girlfriend looking forward to the Sunday call-ins and spending more and more time on the FDR website. "Tom did mention it at the time - although not their ideas about family - and I can remember alarm bells ringing when he said the man who ran it was giving him advice. I warned him that on the internet you don't know who you are talking to." By November 2007, Tom's behaviour had noticeably changed
UPDATE: Influential science fiction and fantasy author Richard Matheson (I Am Legend, The Twilight Zone) died yesterday from natural causes at his home, surrounded by friends and family. He was 87. "For having such a fantastic imagination, he passed very peacefully," son Richard Matheson Jr. told Deadline. "He was not only a monumental talent, he was also every bit a father, friend, and husband." Friend and fellow author Harlan Ellison wrote today, "I am downsmashed."  The celebrated writer began his 6-decade-plus career in 1950 with the story "Born Of Man And Woman," published in The Magazine Of Fantasy And Science Fiction. Matheson's best-known and oft-adapted works ranged from short stories like "Button, Button" (which Richard Kelly adapted into The Box) to novels including I Am Legend (adapted four times into features The Last Man On Earth, The Omega Man, I Am Omega and I Am Legend). Matheson wrote more than a dozen episodes of Rod Serling's Twilight Zone — including "Nightmare At 20,000 Feet," starring William Shatner, which was remade as a segment of 1983's Twilight Zone: The Movie — and penned the evil Kirk "Enemy Within" episode of Star Trek.  Over the decades Hollywood turned frequently to his writing for its twisty but humanist genre storytelling. Films adapted from his works include The Incredible Shrinking Man (1957), The Pit and the Pendulum (1961), Steven Spielberg's Duel (1971), Somewhere in Time (1980), the Will Smith-starrer I Am Legend (2007), and Real Steel (2011). During his career Matheson earned a Writers Guild Association nomination for 1985's Amazing Stories and won the Hugo Award, The Edgar Allen Poe Award, the Bram Stoker Award for Lifetime Achievement from the Horror Writers Association, and a Lifetime Achievement award from the Academy of Science Fiction, Fantasy & Horror Films.  Earlier this year Matheson signed on to adapt his own The Incredible Shrinking Man for MGM with Richard Jr. The pair completed a draft prior to Matheson's passing. A musical adaptation of Matheson's Christopher Reeve-Jane Seymour romance Somewhere In Time opened last month in Portland, OR with an eye toward an eventual Broadway run.
CAASTRO/Loi et al. Plasma tubes in the Earth's magnetosphere have been observed for the first time  A 60-year-old theory about the structure of the magnetic fields that surround Earth has been confirmed directly for the first time. The lead author of the paper is an undergraduate student who invented a way to view the Earth's magnetosphere in three dimensions.  The sun emits a constant stream of charged particles that's supplemented by cosmic rays from sources such as supernovae. As these particles approach Earth, their path is altered by the Earth's magnetic field, which deflects some and funnels others towards the poles, leading to displays such as aurora.  This region, known as the magnetosphere, includes the ionosphere and plasmasphere as its inner layers. These distinctions aside, we don't know all that much about the structure of these regions.  A better understanding would be useful because the ionosphere interferes with satellite navigation systems and the images received by radio telescopes. During her honors project at the University of Sydney, Cleo Loi realized she could use the Murchison Widefield Array (MWA) radio telescope to probe these regions in a way that had never been done before, leading to a paper in the journal Geophysical Research Letters.  The MWA is a forerunner of the Square Kilometer Array (SKA), soon to transform radio astronomy. It consists of 128 antennae spread over three kilometers (almost two miles). Loi suggested that by splitting the observations between those from the eastern and western ends of the array, she would achieve something equivalent to binocular vision, allowing us to see in three dimensions.  For the MWA's usual astronomical work, a three-kilometer baseline does not give the parallax required to see in-depth, but the situation is very different when we are looking close to the Earth.  Loi detected a series of high and low density plasma tubes connecting the ionosphere and plasmasphere running in parallel to the magnetic field. "We measured their position to be about 600 kilometres [373 miles] above the ground, in the upper ionosphere, and they appear to be continuing upwards into the plasmasphere. This is around where the neutral atmosphere ends, and we are transitioning to the plasma of outer space," Loi said. The tubes move slowly with time, so telescopes experience changing interference effects.  Loi told IFLScience that while some limited probing has been done on the ionosphere with other radio telescopes such as the Very Large Array, no one to her knowledge has applied parallax to the problem previously.  "People theorized something like this from observations of a type of very low frequency electromagnetic wave. We can detect lightning from another hemisphere and people concluded there must be plasma tubes guiding the signal," says Loi. "It's a very indirect conclusion, and no one had much idea what these tubes were like."  Loi says she was amazed at how many tubes the MWA's enormous 30° field revealed. "There are no plans to use the SKA for studying the ionosphere, but I am hoping with publicity about this work to change that," she says.
Zakaria Amara is one of Canada's notorious criminals. He's a convicted terrorist, one of the so-called "Toronto 18," an Al Qaeda-inspired group that opposed our military role in Afghanistan. A decade ago members conspired to attack Parliament, blow up truck bombs at the Toronto Stock Exchange and other downtown sites during rush hour, and bomb a military base. Justice Bruce Durno called the plots "spine-chilling" when he sentenced Amara, a mastermind, to life in prison in 2010. Had the group succeeded in detonating one-tonne bombs, the result "would have been catastrophic," the judge said, "the most horrific crime Canada has ever seen," with potentially enormous loss of life.  Court sketch of Zakaria Amara at his guilty plea hearing in 2009.  That was nearly six years ago. Amara, who was born in Jordan and came to Canada with his family as a schoolboy, has long since faded from the headlines. Yet suddenly, Prime Minister Stephen Harper's law-and-order Conservative government has just revoked his Canadian citizenship in the final few weeks of a closely fought election campaign. While the formal process began in June, we are only now learning of it. The cynical opportunism of the decision is stunning. Nor will this be the last such case. It's tempting to not much care what happens to a murderous extremist who scorns our democracy, flouts our laws and seeks to strike fear in our hearts. The Conservatives are counting that the public will shrug, or even cheer them on. But as Liberal Leader Justin Trudeau and New Democrat Tom Mulcair both point out, this sets an appalling precedent, and not just because of its self-serving pandering to the Tory base. As Mulcair noted, it divides Canadians by "creating two different categories of citizenship." And as Trudeau said, one law should apply for all in this country. "As soon as you make citizenship for some Canadians conditional on good behaviour, you devalue citizenship for everyone," he said. Both vow to repeal the law.  Article Continued Below  As the Star has written before, the Harper government was wrong to rewrite the Citizenship Act last year to give itself the power to yank citizenship from dual nationals who make war on this country, or commit crimes of terrorism, treason or spying. It creates an invidious distinction between native-born Canadian criminals (who can't be denied citizenship) and naturalized ones (who are Canadian only on sufferance). It also promotes two classes of punishment for the same crime. Needless to say, these provisions for "two-tier citizenship" are being challenged in Federal Court as an affront to the Constitution's equality rights, due process and mobility rights. Modern citizenship is a fundamental status, not something that can be revoked because the government deems a person not deserving. Banishing citizens is a throwback to totalitarian regimes and primitive eras. It is an affront to many of the seven million foreign-born people – fully a fifth of our population – who have made this country their home. And where does it end? How can the Conservatives justify stripping citizenship rights from terrorist plotters who are caught before they harm anyone, without taking the same approach to mass murderers, serial killers, dangerous offenders and sexual predators? Where does this take us? Whatever their origins, Canadians whose crimes shock the conscience of society should face the full force of the law and the same penalties. There must be one citizenship, and one justice, for all.  Read more about:
While the entire nation prayed for the Olympic contingent at Rio, there was double delight waiting for them at Colombo.  29-year-old Tania Sachdev bagged her maiden gold at the Commonwealth Chess Championship while former world junior champion Abhijeet Gupta managed to retain his title.  Tania, who had bagged a bronze at the Glasgow Commonwealth Chess Championship in 2014, was elated as she spoke to HT shortly after lifting her coveted title.  "I was going for gold from the very beginning as I had missed out on it a few years back. I was one of the players with a higher ranking and hence didn't want to settle for bronze," Tania said. "It was a really competitive event and there were quite a few good chess players in the tourney. It was a good feeling as I grew in confidence as the tournament progressed."  Tania had also bagged gold and two silvers at the Asian Team Championship in Tehran in 2014. "Representing India is always special and so is winning. The win will help me prepare for the upcoming Chess Olympiads in Baku. I will also take part in the Abu Dhabi Chess Festival later this month. Such victories give you a lot of confidence," she added.  Tania, who finished with five victories and four draws, said she never felt she was on the back foot. "I always felt I had the upper hand in all the games but then there were a couple of mistakes I committed that let the games slip away. Those are the areas I need to work on and improve before the upcoming tournaments," Tania said.  Though Tania has won a number of tournaments over the years, failures drive her more than successes. "When I was just five and a half years old, I had lost 0-7 in my first tournament. I didn't lose heart but wanted to play again. I don't get bogged down if I lose badly. I just want to improve and reverse the feeling," Tania chuckled, as she recalled her drubbing two decades back. "It feels good to win a tournament as you look forward towards the next one immediately."  Tania had won the Arjuna award in 2009 and has been a part of the Indian national team for the past nine years. However, Tania is anything but just a chess player. As someone who has been in love with the game since her childhood, Tania has involved herself whenever she has had an opportunity, including commentary. Yes, besides playing matches, she analyses them too. She has commentated in several games, including one between Viswanathan Anand and Magnus Carlsen. Besides being invited to sing the national anthem during a game between Dabangg Delhi and Patna Pirates at the Pro Kabaddi League 2016, Tania also loves modelling.  "I want to promote every aspect of the game and take part in anything and everything that helps me achieve it. I also hosted the Gibraltar Open and Millionaire Chess in Vegas. Whereas most sports demand the physical aspect from a player, chess is an exercise for the mind. I really want to promote the game in a big way and want to take it to the masses. Every child should play the game," Tania added.  Well, for the multifaceted Tania, the mind needs peace. And, Tania has strange ways to achieve that. "I play other sports," she said laughing, realising that wasn't the answer anyone expected. "I play table tennis, go around the city, and do things that have absolutely nothing to do with chess. In Colombo, we were in a lovely resort and the city's beautiful as well, so it helped to get sleep at the end of a tiring day and relax your mind."  First Published: Aug 09, 2016 13:10 IST
Warner Bros. has won a blockbuster victory that could entitle it to maintain its copyright stake in Superman.  On Wednesday, a federal judge in California granted the studio's motion for summary judgment on the question of whether a 1992 agreement with Jean Peavy, the sister of Superman co-creator Joe Shuster, precludes the estate's attempt to terminate a copyright grant. The decision by U.S. District Court Judge Otis Wright comes four years after another federal judge in California confirmed the validity of a termination notice from the estate of the other co-creator, Jerry Siegel. The termination attempts have threatened Warners' hold on its lucrative Superman franchise.  Here's the full ruling.  The judge ruled "that the 1992 Agreement, which represented the Shuster heirs' opportunity to renegotiate the prior grants of Joe Shuster's copyrights, superseded and replaced all prior grants of the Superman copyrights. The 1992 Agreement thus represents the parties' operative agreement and, as a post-1978 grant, it is not subject to termination."  Because Warner Bros. is in the middle of production on next summer's big-budget Man of Steel, directed by Zack Snyder and produced by Christopher Nolan, the studio likely will take tremendous comfort in the latest ruling. It comes after years of nasty litigation with Marc Toberoff, the attorney for the estates.  "The order for the most part is the tentative order issued over six weeks ago before oral argument. We respectfully disagree with its factual and legal conclusions, and it is surprising given that the Judge appeared to emphatically agree with our position at the summary judgment hearing," Toberoff says in a statement to The Hollywood Reporter.  Warners had no comment on the ruling.  Superman was first created in comic form in the 1930s. Shuster drew the character in the early editions of the Action Comics that initially told the Man of Steel's story.  During the later portions of Shuster's life, he struggled to make a living, taking a job as a deliveryman at one point to pay the bills.  Starting in the 1970s, DC Comics (now a subsidiary of Warner Bros.) began making payments to Shuster and Siegel. According to court papers, the co-creators were paid $4 million over the years under a 1975 agreement.  When Shuster died in 1992, Peavy filed an affidavit saying that she was the successor and sole heir to his property. Shuster's will also apparently named Jean's son, Mark Warren Peavy. Nevertheless, after filing her affidavit, Peavy wrote to DC and asked the company to pay her brother's final debts and expenses. DC agreed and also increased survivor benefits, but the company's then-executive vp Paul Levitz admonished, "This agreement would represent the author/heir's last and final deal with DC and would fully resolve any past, present, or future claims against DC."  At the time, Jean said she understood. The following year, she wrote a letter saying she would "stick to our bargain" and not attempt "to reclaim the Superman copyright."  But about a decade later, the Siegels and Shusters engaged Toberoff in an attempt to do just that.  The estates' primary weapon was the so-called "termination rights" in U.S. copyright law. Congress lengthened the copyright term in 1976 but, as an olive branch to artists who had created works at the early stage of their careers but handed their rights over without much bargaining power, gave artists another bite of the apple by allowing them to enjoy the benefits of the latter stages of a copyright term by terminating a copyright grant. As the copyright term has been extended even further in the years since, so too has the power of these termination rights.  But executing a termination notice isn't easy because artists need to adhere to a strict protocol, including sending out precise "termination notices" during a short few-year window. Terminations also have been subject to other limitations including when an artist and studio make what's known as an "agreement to the contrary," negating the termination powers.  Despite the odds, the Siegels tasted success in 2008 when a federal judge ruled they successfully had recaptured copyrights to some -- but not all -- of Superman's defining characteristics, such as his costume, Clark Kent identity and his origin story, as described in the first editions of Action Comics. The scope of the ruling now is under appeal at the 9th Circuit, with arguments being heard soon.  But the Shusters aren't so lucky.  Wright first indicated that he was leaning toward rejecting the termination based on the 1992 agreement in a tentative decision issued during the summer. But at a hearing in September, Toberoff argued that it didn't make sense that in 1992, Warners would be replacing all of their previous contracts dating back to 1938 with the Shuster estate and throwing away the chain of title on Superman that the studio has
Alex Wong/Getty Images  At the outset of the Republican push to overhaul the US tax code, GOP leaders said reform would boost economic growth, help the middle class, and — importantly for the fiscal future of the US — pay for itself.  But on Wednesday, with Congress on the edge of finally passing the massive tax bill, House Speaker Paul Ryan suggested he was not so sure about the last of those promises. Ryan was asked on NBC's "Today" show whether the tax bill would increase the deficit or would pay for itself through economic growth.  "Nobody knows the answer to that question, because that's in the future, but what we do know is that this will increase economic growth," Ryan said.  The GOP acknowledges that the "static" impact of the tax bill — the addition to the debt with no economic-growth assumptions — will be just under $1.5 trillion. The question is whether the bill could grow the economy enough to make up the gap with new tax revenue.  While Republican leaders argued it would, every major independent analysis of the bill, known as the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, showed that it would grow the federal debt over the next 10 years even when accounting for that increased growth.  Major analyses predicted that the bill would be a modest boost for the US economy, increasing the US gross-domestic-product growth anywhere from 0.08 percentage points a year to about 0.35 points a year. But, none of the models show the growth being enough to pay for the bill.  The right-leaning Tax Foundation, which is aggressive in its growth assumptions, estimated that the final bill would add $448 billion to the deficit over the next decade. The Tax Policy Center estimated that the debt increase would be closer to $1.2 trillion. The official congressional scorekeeper, the Joint Committee on Taxation, said that even with the growth, the bill would add $1 trillion in new debt.  A much-maligned report from the Treasury Department said the tax bill would need to be coupled with other economic policies to make up for the new debt.  Ryan eventually pivoted to another way to make up for the new debt the bill would add: spending cuts.  Watch Ryan's response here:
1980 Olympic silver medalist says wrestling should not be dropped from Games  Olympic medalist and seven-time world wrestling champion Valentin Yordanov, who returned his 1996 gold medal last month, today is joined in protest of wrestling being dropped from the Games by Polish wrestler Andrzej Supron, a 1980 silver medalist. (Photo: AFP/Getty Images) Story Highlights Wrestlers are stepping up to demonstrate concern that the sport will be dropped in the 2020 Games  WARSAW, Poland (AP) - The prospect of the Olympics dropping wrestling has led another competitor to return his medal.  Polish wrestler Andrzej Supron is returning his silver medal won in the Greco-Roman lightweight division at the 1980 Moscow Olympics. He joins Bulgaria's seven-time world champion Valentin Yordanov, who last month returned his gold medal from the 1996 Atlanta Olympics.  Supronk says he is "surprised and outraged by the suggestion to remove this ancient sport from the Games," which is being proposed for the 2020 Olympics.  Column: Keeping wrestling could cost other sports  He says he is sending the medal back to IOC President Jacques Rogge.  Supronk, also a former world and European champion, says he is sending the medal back to International Olympic Committe President Jacques Rogge..  Wrestling is now competing with seven proposed new sports for a spot on the 2020 program. The final decision will be made by the IOC in September.
While granting e-cigarette makers a reprieve from some regulations, Dr. Gottlieb said, the F.D.A. will redouble its efforts to protect children from products that contain nicotine, including e-cigarettes, and will pursue regulations of flavored tobacco products designed to appeal to them. E-cigarettes come in many fruit and alcohol flavorings to appeal to "vapers" of all ages, with names like Tutti Frutti and Cupcake.   Public health advocates were cautiously optimistic. Matthew L. Myers, the president of the Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids, called Dr. Gottlieb's agenda a "bold and comprehensive vision, with the potential to accelerate progress in reducing tobacco use and the death and disease it causes.''  At the same time, Mr. Myers criticized the delay given to e-cigarette and cigar companies for complying with previously released rules. In a statement released Friday afternoon, Mr. Myers added, "This long delay will allow egregious, kid-friendly e-cigarettes and cigars, in flavors like gummy bear, cherry crush and banana smash, to stay on the market with little public health oversight. There is no reason to allow these products to stay on the market while developing and implementing the strategy Dr. Gottlieb outlined today."  Dr. Gottlieb said he was prepared for criticism from people in the public health field. He said the F.D.A. needed time to develop solid regulations, rather than just guidance, on how the agency would use its oversight to regulate tobacco and e-cigarette products.  "I'm hopeful that people who follow this issue closely and might have a particular point of view are going to recognize what we are trying to do, to have a significant public health impact,'' he said. "I wouldn't say we are encouraging people to use e-cigarettes, but certainly we'd like to see smokers use F.D.A.-approved cessation packages like gums and patches.''  Dr. Neal Benowitz, a professor at the University of California, San Francisco, School of Medicine, has had many discussions over the years with the F.D.A.'s tobacco chief, Mitchell Zeller, about trying to reduce the nicotine levels in tobacco. He said he was pleased to read Friday's announcement, but felt cigarette makers would not move willingly to reduce nicotine.  "Philip Morris, many years ago, did try to market a low-nicotine cigarette, and there was no commercial market for it," Dr. Benowitz said.
Lily Carter / Gets roped, gagged, and punished  Disgraced 18  18 YEAR OLD WHORES TOTALLY HUMILIATED! Adorable Lily Carter is new in town and she's a barnyard bitch witha a mouth on her. You know how we like to do it here at Porn Pros, we're about to check this bitch and put her sexy ass straight. Oh the joy of fondling her small petite frame and perky tits and I swear her pussy is like a tight sucking sea anemone...... 18 USC 2257 Please rate this gallery : 5 - Excelent 4 - Good 3 - Normal 2 - No Bad 1 - Bad Show comments (0)
I purchased the Tenga 3D Spiral Masturbator for my OH. He has wanted it for ages and he doesn't have a masturbator that he really likes yet. Well, he didn't. He certainly does now!  It arrived discreetly packaged in the usual plain brown Lovehoney box. Inside the box, the spiral comes in its very own presentation case. It looks like some sort of award, on its black plinth and under a clear plastic casing. I lifted the casing off and took the Tenga Spiral out. It feels unlike anything else I have ever felt. Stretchy, squidgy, soft, really nice but very different.  The Tenga Spiral measures 4.75 inches in length, (4.5 inches insertable length), and it has an opening hole of just 0.5 inches. This might seem a little small at first glance, but it is very very stretchy. It's made of antibacterial elastomer. It also warms up quite quickly, after only five minutes of handling the Spiral it was much warmer than out of the case. I knew my OH was going to like this, but I wanted it to be a surprise.  My OH had no idea I had purchased the Tenga Spiral for him. I blindfolded him, handcuffed his wrists and ankles to the bed, and warmed him up with a little oral teasing. I then lubed up the spiral and proceeded to pleasure him with it. I have never known him groan like that before. He absolutely loves how it feels, and he came really quickly.  Afterwards, I showed him what he was pleasured with, and he said it was better than his wildest dreams. When I asked was it better than me he wouldn't answer. He has used this quite a few times since I purchased it for him. He likes the textured side for extra stimulation but says the smooth side feels very realistic. Smooth side inwards there is a small area at the end of the spiral that is just a little wider and allows for the head of the penis with comfort.  It's really easy to clean and by turning it inside out you can get to all the little ridges. A sprinkle of renewal powder and back into the case ready for next time.  The Tenga Spiral really is a great male masturbator and I wish I had purchased it for my OH sooner. The feel of the material is fabulous. It's silent and holds no air pockets, so there are no unpleasant or distracting squelching noises sometimes associated with male masturbators. This is a top notch toy, pleasure for any man in the palm of his hand.
But one of the many policies Trump acted on today stood out In his first full weekday as president, Donald Trump kept quite busy, moving forward on a series of executive orders and actions – an approach to governing Republicans seemed to find offensive when there was a Democrat in the White House.But one of the many policies Trump acted on today stood out as especially important  Trump … acted Monday to reinstate the so-named "Mexico City policy" first instituted by Ronald Reagan. That directive essentially barred recipients of U.S. foreign aid from promoting abortion as a method of family planning. In the early days of his presidency, Bill Clinton reversed the Reagan-backed policy; President George W. Bush reinstated it shortly after his election; and President Barack Obama revoked it – each in their first few days as president.  The "Mexico City" policy prohibits US dollars and contraceptive supplies from going to any international family planning program that provides abortions or counsels women about their reproductive health options. The policy isn't about money going to pay for abortions. Even those groups that use only private funds for abortion services – where abortion is legal – are barred from assistance. This is money going to family planning programs. […]   [N]ot only are organizations that provide or counsel about abortion services affected; those that dare to take part in a public discussion about legalizing abortion are also affected (hence the name "global gag rule")…. This policy has nothing to do with government-sponsored abortions overseas. Ten years before the gag rule was in place the law strictly prohibited that. This policy is about disqualifying prochoice organizations from receiving US international family planning funding.   Under Bush's policy, organizations that play a vital role in women's health are forced to make an impossible choice. If they refuse to be "gagged," they lose the funding that enables them to help women and families who are cut off from basic health care and family planning. But if they accept funding, they must accept restrictions that jeopardize the health of the women they serve.
Sell Your Books To Myopic  Here's how…  During walk-in hours (Fridays 6pm – 10pm, Saturdays 9am – 4pm) , please sign in at the front desk. Everyone is seen in the order they arrive.  , please sign in at the front desk. Everyone is seen in the order they arrive. Bring up to 3 boxes or 4 grocery bags once per day.  Any books we don't buy must go back with you.  Myopic does not accept donations or dispose of unwanted books.  If you can't come on Friday or Saturday, call and we'll work out a time for you (773.862.4882).  Large Collections  To sell 8 or more boxes of books, call 773.862.4882 to arrange a one-on-one appointment with a buyer on Tuesdays at either 4pm or 7pm. Myopic does NOT do house calls.  Guidelines  Books with water damage, mold or mildew, musty smell, insect damage, food stains, etc. are not accepted. Books with your name written inside are fine; books with highlighting, underlining or margin notes are not. Bindings must be intact, no spiral or stapled bindings.  Myopic will only quote offers on books we see in-store, in-hand.
This week Sam Bashor and DJ Wooldridge are joined by Jamie Morton from the hit podcast "My Dad Wrote a Porno"! His father wrote the aforementioned porno and each episode he and his co-hosts read a chapter from that insane story.  Now he's stopping by to visit the boi-people and they discuss porn writing tips, favorite episodes, "The Florida Project", "The Death of Stalin", "South Park" and MORE!
books.google.com - From August 29 to September 7, 2006, a large group of distinguished lecturers and young physicists coming from various countries around the world met in Erice, Italy, at the Ettore Majorana Foundation and Centre for Scientific Culture (EMFCSC) for the 44th course of the International School of Subnuclear...  https://books.google.com/books/about/The_Logic_of_Nature_Complexity_and_New_P.html?id=B9HeDuKmDKEC&utm_source=gb-gplus-share  The Logic of Nature, Complexity and New Physics
The speech First Lady Michelle Obama delivered at Tuesday night's Democratic convention read at a twelfth grade level, according to an analysis by a University of Minnesota political scientist, making it, by that measure, the most complex speech delivered by a presidential candidate's spouse at a nominating convention.  By contrast, the speech delivered by Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney's wife, Ann, checked in at a fifth grade reading level. Romney's speech marked the lowest reading level for a spouse's convention speech since the practice first began in 1992, according to Eeic Ostermeier, the Minnesota political scientists.  SPONSORED  Ostermeier reached his findings using the Flesch-Kincaid readability test, a metric that rates sentence structure and difficulty of word use, and then computes numbers corresponding to grade levels to indicate how verbally advanced a given text is. For example, longer sentences and words score more points, while monosyllabic words score fewer points.  Based on that rubric, Obama's speech posted the highest score, at 12.84, of any spouse's convention speech since the practice began in 1992, topping her own previous high mark of 9.28—or a ninth grade reading level—she set with her speech at the 2008 Democratic Convention.  Rounding out the top five highest scoring speeches are Teresa Heinz Kerry's 2004 speech (9.20) and Elizabeth Doles 1996 speech (8.51.)  While Mrs. Obama's convention speech set a new high, her husband, President Obama, has delivered all three of his state of the union addresses at an eighth grade level.
Toilet roll has been in short supply in the South American country in recent months, with economists blaming price controls imposed by the government.  The new programme, launched last week, uses crowdsourcing technology to enable users to let each other know which supermarkets still have stocks of the tissue.  Called Abasteceme – "Supply Me" in English – the free Android app has already been downloaded more than 12,000 times.  Creator Jose Augusto Montiel said most downloads have been made by residents from the capital Caracas.  He said: "Lots of things are in short supply, but what people are most worried about is finding toilet paper. People never knew how much they needed it until it started running out."  Nicolas Maduro, who became Venezuelan president earlier this year, claims anti-government forces are deliberately buying up basics like toilet paper to destabilise the country.
Privacy  PRIVACY POLICY Complies with the European General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)   This Privacy Policy describes how and when I collect, use, and share information when you purchase an item from me, contact me, or otherwise use my services through Etsy.com or its related sites and services.   This Privacy Policy does not apply to the practices of third parties that I do not own or control, including Etsy or any third party services you access through Etsy. You can reference the Etsy Privacy Policy to learn more about its privacy practices.   1. INFORMATION I COLLECT   To fulfil your order, you must provide me with certain information (which you authorised Etsy to provide to me), such as your name, email address, postal address and the details of the product that you're ordering. You may also choose to provide me with additional personal information (for a custom order, for example), if you contact me directly.   2. WHY I NEED YOUR INFORMATION & HOW I USE IT   I rely on a number of legal bases to collect, use, and share your information, including:  - as needed to provide my services, such as when I use your information to fulfil your order, to settle disputes, or to provide customer support;  - when you have provided your affirmative consent, which you may revoke at any time, such as by signing up for my mailing list;  - if necessary to comply with a legal obligation or court order or in connection with a legal claim, such as retaining information about your purchases if required by tax law;  - as necessary for the purpose of my legitimate interests, if those legitimate interests are not overridden by your rights or interests, such as 1) providing and improving my services. I use your information to provide the services you requested and in my legitimate interest to improve my services; and 2) Compliance with the Etsy Seller Policy and Terms of Use. I use your information as necessary to comply with my obligations under the Etsy Seller Policy and Terms of Use.   3. INFORMATION SHARING & DISCLOSURE   Information about my customers is important to my business. I share your personal information for very limited reasons and in limited circumstances, as follows:  - Etsy. I share information with Etsy as necessary to provide you with my services and comply with my obligations under both the Etsy Seller Policy and Etsy Terms of Use.  - Service providers. I engage certain trusted third parties to perform functions and provide services to my shop, such as delivery companies. I will share your personal information with these third parties, but only to the extent necessary to perform these services.  - Business transfers. If I sell or merge my business, I may disclose your information as part of that transaction, only to the extent permitted by law.  - Compliance with laws. I may collect, use, retain, and share your information if I have a good belief that it is reasonably necessary to: (a) respond to legal process or to government requests; (b) enforce my agreements, terms and policies; (c) prevent, investigate, and address fraud and other illegal activity, security, or technical issues; or (d) protect the rights, property, and safety of my customers, or others.  - Data Retention. I retain your personal information only for as long as necessary to provide you with my services and as described in my Privacy Policy. However, I may also be required to retain this information to comply with my legal and regulatory obligations, to resolve disputes, and to enforce my agreements. I generally keep your data for up to7 years (as required by UK tax law).  - Transfers of Personal Information Outside the EU. I may store and process your information through third-party hosting services in the US and other jurisdictions. As a result, I may transfer your personal information to a jurisdiction with different data protection and government surveillance laws than your jurisdiction. If I am deemed to transfer information about you outside of the EU, I rely on Privacy Shield as the legal basis for the transfer, as Google Cloud is Privacy Shield certified.   4. YOUR RIGHTS   If you reside in certain territories, including the EU, you have a number of rights in relation to your personal information. While some of these rights apply generally, certain rights apply only in certain limited cases. I describe these rights below:  - Access. You may have the right to access and receive a copy of the personal information I hold about you by contacting me using the contact information below.  - Change, restrict, delete. You may also have rights to change, restrict my use of, or delete your personal information. Apart from exceptional circumstances (like where I am required to store data for legal reasons) I will generally delete your personal information upon request.  - Object. You can object to (i) my processing of some of your information based on my legitimate interests and (ii) receiving marketing messages from me after providing your
MANILA, Philippines — President Rodrigo Duterte has signed a new law prohibiting the issuance of a gift check that bears an expiry date, and imposing an expiry date on the stored value, credit, or balance of the gift check.  Duterte signed last December 19 Republic Act No. 10962, or An Act Regulating the Issuance, Use and Redemption of Gift Checks.  Under the fresh law, a copy of which was released by Malacañang on Friday, refusing to honor the unused value, credit, or balance stored in the instrument is likewise prohibited.  Violators of RA 10962 are obligated to return the unused balance of the gift check within 90 days from the declaration of the violation. They are also subject to a fine that in no case be less than P500,000 nor more than P1 million.  Meanwhile, gift checks that are issued to consumers including, but not limited to, those under loyalty, rewards, or promotional programs, as determined by the Department of Trade and Industry, are not covered by the new law.  "Upon effectivity of this ACT, all gift checks already issued shall be covered by the provisions of this Act," the law said.  "It is the policy of the State to protect the interests of the consumer, promote the general welfare and establish standards of conduct for business and industry," it added.
Interview with Natassja from Bleach battalion Last year i bought a whole bunch of of cd's and lp's from Pure Impact records and found a demo for sale by an American band i had never heard of before. The bands name was Bleach battalion , a female fronted band playing raw, basic and classic Oi!. Searched around and finally got in contact with the singer Natassja. Being a good sport she accepted to do an interview for the greatest site since google. Hi Natassja. First off all thanks for taking the time to answer these questions. Could you please tell me a bit about yourself and the band. Oi! there. Thanks for the interview. First off, "myself" is pretty much the same thing as "the band" as far as writing and recording goes. I write the music & lyrics, sing, and play all the instruments on all of the recordings except for the demo Model Citizens which had Kyle on drums and my best friend Jaye on bass on a couple tracks. I occasionally have friends come in to help do backup/gang vocals when needed. Right now for Live Shows, I just play guitar and sing, and I have a rhythm section of Jim on drums and Adam on bass/rhythm guitar. I also have a couple of East Coast stand-ins on-call for live bass: Ryan in Long Island and Steve in NYC. Bassists seem to be hard to hold onto so I got a few backups. From what i understand you have been in other bands prior to Bleach Battalion. Tell us about them. Yes, I have done many bands in several styles/genres from my own solo work doing reggae/ska (under the name Natassja Noctis ), to Americana/rockabilly music with a band called Gravemist . As far as Oi! / punk stuff I played guitar in the skinhead hardcorepunk band Skullkrusher (who released several tapes and CDs and one 7" record) and the skinhead Oi! band Wardogs back in the 1990s (ex- Deadscene members who only had one release but mainly was a live band). I guess I officially started my "Oi! career" back in 1996 with a band called Drunken Catholics who did one demo and a barrage of local shows. Whats the Bleach battalion discography so far? Thus far we have released: 2008: Model Citizens Demo/EPCD 2009: Knuckle Girls MaxiSingle CD (out of print), Never Fall CDEP 2010: Loud, Proud and Drunk as Fuck ! DigiEP, The Kicker CDLP To order the albums that are currently available in CD form, Releasing and recording the records by yourself is an easy way to get your band out there. Would you like to have a record deal or do you prefer it without the middle hand? It's not as easy as it may seem sometimes to go "DIY", because some people like to play "competition", even in underground scenes, by talking shit (online and off), spreading rumours, etc, which is hard to combat alone. However, I think once people actually listen to the songs it clears up most any "political" rumours. I would certainly welcome a record deal as long as it was fair and allowed for me to maintain creative control, no censoring, no ripoffs, etc. The band has gone through many lineup changes and at many times left you as a onewoman band. I can guess being a musical lonewolf gives you creative freedom. Am i right? Yes, it actually works better for me that way. In the past, working with so many "alpha" personalities usually created an atmosphere where nothing got done, no proper promotion, no good recordings, and so on. Only one person, Jaye ( Gravemist ), has ever been actually very cool to work with honestly, everyone else had these huge rockstar egos or attitude problems. Keeping it where I can have players who just show up for the fun of the show because they like what I have already set up as the Bleach Battalion archetype is better than trying to meld several minds into working on one consistent creative "idea". How did you get in contact with Peter from Pure Impact records? Online. I found a banner to his site on some Oi! site (which i don't remember), and just emailed to ask if he wanted any copies of our demo which was out at the time. The same demo is available in the USA from Angry, Young and Poor but I wanted a European distro to carry it too, so shipping costs wouldnt be so high for supporters overseas. Many bands are today turning to street-punk, hardcore and rock so its nice to see a band like yours playing classic Oi!. What bands have influenced your sound the most? Oh the big question! I will try to keep it brief and mainly list just the bands which have had a major direct infleunce on our sound/style, or else it would be very long as I am
The issue is as tangled as cage netting washed ashore after winter storms. Forty years ago it was seen as a burgeoning industry, a salvation for fisherman, and a pathway towards a sustainable fishery that would protect wild stocks. Salmon, once a rare treat for anglers and a staple for many coastal native groups, was commodified into a mainstream supermarket fish.  In the late 1960's, faced with declining wild stocks, Norwegian fishers began "farming" Atlantic Salmon (Salmo salar) in open pens on the coastline. It was a huge commercial success and this form of aquaculture soon spread to Scotland, Canada, Chile and elsewhere. Over the years it has grown to become a colossal global industry worth on the order of $10.7 billion annually. Norway produces 33 per cent of farmed salmon followed by Chile (31 per cent), Scotland (9 per cent), Canada (8 per cent), Faeroe Island (3 per cent), and the USA (3 per cent) with producers in other countries accounting for the remaining 13 per cent. Over time, however, flies began to appear in the ointment.  Aquaculture or Salmon feedlots?  Over time and unanticipated, a suite of problems began to attach themselves to the salmon aquaculture industry, fouling the once clear waters and sucking blood, and money, from the enterprise.  Excrement  Salmon excrete. Wild salmon swim in small schools ranging over large areas of the ocean and this droppings vanish into the water column, often consumed by small invertebrates, or else is otherwise dissipated. Salmon in open pens are kept in close confinement in enormous numbers. Large sea cages can house up to 90,000 fish, and one farm now planned for St. Mary's Bay in Nova Scotia is licensed for 1.4 million fish. Such quantities of fish produce colossal amounts of waste that sinks to the bottom (along with uneaten food and dead fish) destroying life below the cages and in their immediate vicinity. A black, anoxic sludge covered by white bacterial mats results.  Since open pens are sited in sheltered bays to protect them from storms, currents are typically insufficient to dissipate these putrefying sediments, or else limited water circulation simply succeeds in spreading the mess more widely, destroying even larger areas of the sea bottom. Given that many coastal sites are also home to other forms of aquaculture (oysters, mussels, etc.) or existing shellfish, lobster, or fin-fish fisheries, such a spreading toxic sewage deposit is of understandable concern to both fisher folk and marine ecologists.  Heavy metal pollution  A significant problem in open net cages is "fouling" in other words the growth of marine algae, hydroids, tunicates, barnacles, mussels, and other marine organisms all over the cages themselves. This not only restricts the circulation of water through the cages but also complicates all kinds of work that needs to be done. Consequently, various anti-fouling (i.e., toxic) substances such as copper-based paints are often applied to equipment. Furthermore, zinc is added to the feed of salmon as a nutritional supplement. Both of these heavy metals end up in the waste and excrement sludge below the enclosures, and they can subsequently leach into surrounding waters. Both can be toxic of other marine animals such as lobsters.  Parasites  Sea lice are small copepods in the family Caligidae. They are ectoparasites that feed on the mucus, skin, and blood of host fish, to which they attach themselves. Some sea lice (notably Lepeophtheirus salmonis and several species of Caligus) are parasites of salmon. Under normal circumstances, these parasites are of minor concern with respect to wild salmon, since a whole host of biological conditions (the biology of host and parasite, the timing of salmon breeding and subsequent migration of smolt to the sea, the relatively dispersed schools of wild fish, etc.) keep parasite numbers to a minimum.  However, as biologist Alexandra Morton and others have demonstrated on the Canadian Pacific coast, in salmon farms, the density of fish, and the fact that they stay in one location for their entire lives, creates a hothouse environment for sea lice in which they can increase their populations geometrically, and move readily from fish to fish. Sea lice can weaken, injure, disfigure, and kill fish and so a whole cornucopia of treatment options -- organophosphates, pyrethroids, avermectins, topical treatments with hydrogen peroxide, growth regulators, etc. -- have been developed in response. One problem is that these chemicals can then enter the environment, affecting various non-target organisms, such as lobsters and crabs, which are also crustaceans.  Of equal concern is the fact that these open pen salmon feedl
Extra perspective is always a good thing. While we strive to spend a good bit of time in reviewing a phone, nothing quite gives you a full impression of a phone like using it day-in and day-out for weeks and months on end. The Galaxy Note 5 really won us (and many others, from the looks of it) over in our first evaluation of it — and again after two months — and now that we've reached the six month point since launch it's worth yet another revisit. It's fair to say right from the start that this big phone has held up over time, but what about the finer points of the experience? That's what we're here to evaluate.  Solid, but sometimes slippery, hardware  2015 marked a huge step forward in the hardware quality of Samsung's leading devices, and the Galaxy Note 5 is the prime example of that. It's still a strikingly attractive phone, so long as you enjoy the bright mirrored color options, and you can't deny that the artful combination of metal and glass can turn heads. And after months of daily use, it's held up well for the most part. In terms of physical wear-and-tear, my Note 5 has never been placed in a case and looks no worse for it. Despite a few drops onto hard surfaces from cringe-worthy heights, I only have a couple small scuffs along the metal frame and some barely-noticeable scratches on the Gorilla Glass 4 display glass. I can't say the same about many of my previous phones. The Note 5 still looks great, but the tradeoff has been how slick it can be Despite the surprising durability, the slipperiness of the whole thing has worn on me in these six months. The curved glass on the back of the Note 5 definitely helps you get a grip on the sides, but the entirety of the back being one solid glass surface doesn't give you enough to hold onto. It's enough when you're just holding the phone and reading something, but when it comes to typing, interacting with the screen and manipulating items using one hand you start to feel it shifting more than you'd like. Add to that an almost unmanageable amount of fingerprints and smudges that accumulate on the back glass, and you have a recipe for at minimum feeling uncomfortable holding the phone and at worst dropping it. One aspect of the Note 5's hardware that hasn't faded in any way since launch is the display. The QHD Super AMOLED Panel wowed me the minute I took it out of the box, and six months on it's still just glorious to look at every time I wake the phone from sleep. Colors are bright (although by design, not particularly accurate), everything looks amazingly crisp and the screen can get both super bright and very dim when necessary. I'm not sure what else I can expect from a display on a smartphone at this point. Spectacular camera  What can you say about the Note 5's camera that hasn't already been said? It's a pretty common refrain at this point to gush over the speed of the whole experience and the quality of the resulting photos, and even after six months with this camera I haven't found another that matches it. Being able to quickly launch the camera with two presses of the home button hasn't lost its utility, nor has the ability to instantly capture HDR photos in quick succession without any extra time waiting for processing. Add in the full suite of manual controls and RAW picture output when you need it, and you have a fantastic complete package. Take a look at some of my favorite shots from the Note 5 in this gallery.  If there's a single knock to be applied here, it's that by default the Note 5's screen is so aggressive in making every image on it look supernaturally great that you get an unrealistic view of what your photos actually look like. It's great when you're viewing images on the web or want wonderful graphics in a game, but when it comes to getting the most accurate view of how other people are going to see your photos online, viewing them on your Note 5's screen gives a bit of a distorted view. (Changing the display settings to "Basic" certainly mitigates this effect.) The experience  Hardware is one part of the story when using a phone, but there's so much more to consider when evaluating a device after months of use. It's about how all of the different parts come together to make a functional phone that you actually enjoy using every day. As it turns out, the Note 5 checks a lot of boxes here. Software and performance When it comes to daily performance and getting through tasks on the Note 5, it still stands up as a competitor among the fastest phones out there today. People can (and will) argue about RAM management and processor benchmarks, but when I'm using the phone for my daily tasks there isn't anything that it can't handle just fine. Whether it's quickly switching between apps, handling heavy web pages, playing games or just maintaining a smooth
i see here nobody races   tragic The original Hillockfarms  RIP IHavSixLinkSearingTouch (73 dual incinerate templar) 8/11/2013  RIP TwoShavronnesOneFlask 9/11/2014  6L count: 10  GGG is tracking your processes, better stop downloading that My Little Pony porn :^) Posted by Goatsebusters  on on Quote this Post  " Lyralei " TherosPherae  Now, I can't be entirely sure about this, since the "full" keyword has only been used with respect to Life up to this point, but if you take Eldritch Battery, that should give you the 40% movespeed bonus constantly, right? Now, I can't besure about this, since the "full" keyword has only been used with respect to Life up to this point, but if you take Eldritch Battery, that should give you the 40% movespeed bonus constantly, right?   Seeing as how 0/0 mana is considered full mana (does not trigger Infernal Mantle's penalty) it would be fairly safe to assume that running Eldritch Battery would treat you as full ES all the time (0/0). Seeing as how 0/0 mana is considered full mana (does not trigger Infernal Mantle's penalty) it would be fairly safe to assume that running Eldritch Battery would treat you as full ES all the time (0/0).   Now THAT is interesting. Now THAT is interesting. Designer of 'Oni-Goroshi, Charan's sword'. Yes, I wrote all those lines. Even the really bad ones. I'm sorry. Posted by The_Scourge  on Alpha Member on Quote this Post  " Goatsebusters   tragic i see here nobody racestragic   I'm sure plenty of people here race, but you can't exactly make a unique 'for racing' given the drop rate of uniques. I'm sure plenty of people here race, but you can't exactly make a unique 'for racing' given the drop rate of uniques. Designer of 'Oni-Goroshi, Charan's sword'. Yes, I wrote all those lines. Even the really bad ones. I'm sorry. Posted by The_Scourge  on Alpha Member on Quote this Post  " Lyralei " TherosPherae  Now, I can't be entirely sure about this, since the "full" keyword has only been used with respect to Life up to this point, but if you take Eldritch Battery, that should give you the 40% movespeed bonus constantly, right? Now, I can't besure about this, since the "full" keyword has only been used with respect to Life up to this point, but if you take Eldritch Battery, that should give you the 40% movespeed bonus constantly, right?   Seeing as how 0/0 mana is considered full mana (does not trigger Infernal Mantle's penalty) it would be fairly safe to assume that running Eldritch Battery would treat you as full ES all the time (0/0). Seeing as how 0/0 mana is considered full mana (does not trigger Infernal Mantle's penalty) it would be fairly safe to assume that running Eldritch Battery would treat you as full ES all the time (0/0).  0/0 is not full mana. It's just not low mana either. 0/0 is not full mana. It's just not low mana either. Posted by Daniel_GGG  on Grinding Gear Games on Quote this Post  " Daniel_GGG " Lyralei " TherosPherae  Now, I can't be entirely sure about this, since the "full" keyword has only been used with respect to Life up to this point, but if you take Eldritch Battery, that should give you the 40% movespeed bonus constantly, right? Now, I can't besure about this, since the "full" keyword has only been used with respect to Life up to this point, but if you take Eldritch Battery, that should give you the 40% movespeed bonus constantly, right?   Seeing as how 0/0 mana is considered full mana (does not trigger Infernal Mantle's penalty) it would be fairly safe to assume that running Eldritch Battery would treat you as full ES all the time (0/0). Seeing as how 0/0 mana is considered full mana (does not trigger Infernal Mantle's penalty) it would be fairly safe to assume that running Eldritch Battery would treat you as full ES all the time (0/0).  0/0 is not full mana. It's just not low mana either. 0/0 is not full mana. It's just not low mana either.  Aw. And
Solitaire has been included as a free game with copies of Windows since 1990's Windows 3.0, and Windows 10 is no different. This time around the game includes a robust set of card faces, new game types, coins, tournaments and, oh yes, a chance to pay $10 a year to remove video ads.  Microsoft Solitaire Collection comes pre-installed and includes five different variations, daily challenges and a bunch of themes. The game also allows you to earn achievements and compare how you're doing on a global leaderboard.  The ads in the game seem to show up randomly between game matches as a full screen take-over video ad which runs for about 30 seconds.  Paying $9.99 for a year of premium Solitaire (or $1.49 for a month) removes the video ads, and delivers more coins for daily challenges and a boost in two modes of play.  The Windows 8.1 version of the game also included the ability to pay to remove ads, though it wasn't pre-installed with the operating system.
Published on 20-04-2015 15:52  This article was written by the TSR community  Course Structure   Admissions  Entry Requirements  Star (*) : Interview  FPC : 5 year Foundation pharmacy course is available  Have not achieved the grades to study Pharmacy?  University of Brighton - Students can applyinternally in their first or second year of BSc in Pharmaceutical and Chemical Sciences, where they need "an overall average mark of not less than 65%; Not less than a mark of 50% in any assessed component; Any modules that are assessed as pass/fail only, will need to be passed but will not be part of the calculation above and these will need to be achieved at the 1st attempt at the module".  Kingston University: the BSc in Pharmaceutical Science course allows you to transfer to the first year of Pharmacy, when certain marks have been obtained in modules of the Pharmaceutical science course.  Interview Hints and Tips  Common Interview Questions  Name three drug delivery systems  What does MRSA stand for?  Name three ways we isolate/discover drugs  Name a prescription only medicine (POM) and what it does  Why does insulin have to be administered intravenous only?  A long division question  Name some drugs which you will find exclusively in a hospital pharmacy  What is insulin?  If a patient wants to take insulin orally, what must be done to the drug? (Hint: dosage form)  What is antibacterial resistance? How does it occur?  What can one do to prevent resistance?  Would you prescribe a patient who is suffering from flu antibiotics? Why?  What functional groups give certain properties to a molecule?  Name three ways a pharmacist helps to promote health in the community  Have you read anything interesting in the news recently related with pharmacy?  Why do you want to study Pharmacy?  What skills does a pharmacist need/have?  What particular subject in pharmacy interested you?  Where in the profession do you see yourself in 10 years time?  What's the difference between Medicine and Pharmacy?  Specific University Questions  Why Reading and not a university in London?  TWO mental arithmetic question e.g adding things together that are in diff units e.g .3ml + 30ml + 3L  Tell me about your work experience.  What part of chemistry do you enjoy and why?  Tell me what you know about pharmacy?  Why Hertfordshire?  What skills do pharmacists require?  Name 3 ways in which pharmacists' promote healthy living in the community  If you were a qualified pharmacist now, what one thing would you like doing and dislike doing?  Why Liverpool?  Which subjects other than science do you study that may be helpful when you are a pharmacist?  What is your other favourite university after LJMU? And why?  What qualities must a pharmacist have?  Talk about how the heart works.  Give a way in which a drug may be administered.  UCAS Form & Personal Statement  Course Structure  First Year Topics  Biochemistry Organic Chemistry  Pharmaceutical Analysis  Pharmacy Practice  Physical Pharmacy  Second Year Topics  Cardio-Respiratory System  Pharmacy Practice  Nutrition, Metabolism and Excretion  Drug Development, Formulation and Product Design  Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Immunology and Antimicrobial Chemotherapy  Life as a Pharmacy Student  How to Cope on a Pharmacy Placement  Code of Conduct  Graduate Destinations and Career Prospects  Professional Issues and Professional Bodies  Professional and Regulatory Bodies  Resources for Pharmacy Students  Academic Textbooks  Rang & Dale's Pharmacology by Humphrey Rang, Maureen Dale, James Ritter and Rod Flower.  Aulton's Pharmaceutics: The Design and Manufacture of Medicines by Michael Aulton.  Principles of Anatomy and Physiology (12th edition) by Gerard J. Tortora and Bryan H. Derrickson.  Clinical Pharmacy and Therapeutics by Roger Walker and Cate Whittlesea.  Oxford Handbook of Practical Drug Therapy by Duncan Richards, Jeffrey Aronson, D.John Reynolds and Jamie Coleman.  Oxford Handbook of Clinical Pharmacy by Phillip Wiffen, Marc Mitchell, Melanie Snelling and Nicole Stoner.  Pharmaceutical Dosage Forms and Drug Delivery by Ram I. Mahato and Ajit S. Narang.  Crash Course: Endocrine and Reproductive Systems by Alexander Finlayson.  Hugo and Russell's Pharmaceutical Microbiology
Serious allegations are being raised in the legal community that the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau has recruited the U.S. Trustee Program to collect bankruptcy data on its behalf to aid a controversial data-mining program.  Documents obtained by the Washington Examiner describe efforts by the CFPB to collect a decade's worth of private financial data on the consumer behavior of five million American citizens without their knowledge or consent. The CFPB data-mining campaign has alarmed privacy watchdogs.  The USTP was created by Congress in 1978 to be a rigorously neutral agency within the U.S. Department of Justice. Its attorneys are supposed to be "impartial" and to serve as a "watchdog over the bankruptcy process," according to the agency's website.  If USTP is aiding CFPB's data-mining program in any manner, bankruptcy authorities argue it would constitute an "unprecedented" violation of the organization's reason for being and destroy its independence.  Officials with CFPB and USTP were reluctant to respond to questions about their agencies' relationship and the data-mining program.  Concerns were first sparked on May 11, 2012, when USTP attorney J. Steven Wilkes filed an unusual discovery request before the U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Tampa, Fla.  Citing a small number of Florida-based bankruptcy cases filed before the court, Wilkes asked for millions of unrelated bankruptcy files nationwide that were in the possession of Morgan Drexen, a California-based administrative-support company serving more than 100 bankruptcy lawyers.  Wilkes asked for all Morgan Drexen cases in its system from Jan. 1, 2008, for Chapter, 7, 11, 12 or 13 proceedings, where the company "was at any time assisting an attorney for a debtor in a bankruptcy proceeding."  Although filed in the Region 21 bankruptcy court, Wilkes' request covered the entire United States.  In its reply, the Costa Mesa-based company argued that the request was beyond the regional bankruptcy court's jurisdiction because Wilkes "seeks the production of documents and other items relating to any bankruptcy case, presumably pending in any court in the United States."  The company argued the request was "overbroad" and "well beyond the relevancy of the matters at issue in this case." In June 2012, the company asked federal Bankruptcy Judge Caryl E. Delano to issue a "protective order" against the request.  Last November, the judge agreed with Morgan Drexen. She sharply limited the U.S. Trustee's access to files for only seven Florida bankruptcy cases.  Both CFPB and Morgan Drexen are now battling through competing lawsuits before federal courts in Washington, D.C., and in California.  The Wilkes request raised serious issues about the USTP's independence and whether CFPB is trying to politicize the judicial program so it can do the bureau's the bidding on data mining, according to bankruptcy and constitutional law experts.  Steven M. Berman, a Florida-based bankruptcy attorney for Shumaker, Loop & Kendrick, which represents Morgan Drexen in Florida, said Wilkes' request has caused legal alarms to go off outside the bankruptcy court.  Berman said he was initially confused by Wilkes' far-reaching request, but on further reflection wondered if it might be on behalf of CFPB.  "I do remember Steven telling me something about 'other agencies are interested or involved or looking into this' when we had our discussions," Berman said.  Berman's suspicions were confirmed by a July 18, 2012, email from Wilkes that noted a separate CFPB request for documents and said his office would be interested in receiving documents that "will be produced to the CFPB."  "Yeah, that's pretty unusual," Berman said of Wilkes' reference in the email to CFPB. "I've been a bankruptcy lawyer for 23 years. I don't think I've ever had that experience."  A month before Wilkes filed his motion before the bankruptcy court, CFPB had started a "nonpublic law enforcement investigation" against Morgan Drexen.  On April 13, 2012, CFPB requested all of the company's internal business documents and its document management database "in which Morgan Drexen has electronic records relating to Debt Settlement."  Morgan Drexen executives estimate the CFPB request involves millions of private documents of financially distressed Americans. The company is a software storage company that holds the documents for bankruptcy lawyers.  Berman said Wilkes' wide-ranging request clearly suggested cooperation between USTP and CFPB. "Once I saw the things that were being requested, it made sense that he wasn't just asking for the U.S. Trustee Program because the things he was asking for were beyond their statutory jurisdiction."  Donald A. Workman, a bankruptcy attorney for
Advancement Award Knots  The following table displays all of the current adult advancement awards available. The requirements to earn and wear each award can be found by clicking on the requirements link under each award. A brief description of each award is listed below.   Eagle Scout Award  Requirements  Youth Religious   Requirements  Arrow of Light   Requirements  Tiger Cub Coach Award  Requirements  Adult Religious   Requirements  Den Leader Award  Requirements  Den Leader Coach  Requirements  Webelos Leader   Requirements  Cubmaster Award  Requirements  Scoutmaster  Award of Merit  Requirements  Cub Scouter Award   Requirements  Scouters Training  Requirements  District  Award of Merit  Requirements  Heroism Award   Requirements  Scouter's Key   Requirements  Distinguished  Commissioneer  Service Award  Requirements  O.A. Distinguished  Service Award  Requirements  Medal of Merit   Requirements  Professional Training  Award  Requirements  Quartermaster   Requirements  Honor Medal   Requirements  Honor Medal   Requirements  James E. West Award   Requirements  Hornaday Award  Requirements  Silver Beaver   Requirements  Silver Antelope   Requirements  Silver Buffalo   Requirements  Whitney M. Young  Service Award  Requirements  Daniel Carter Beard Masonic Scouter Award   Requirements  Spurgeon Award  Requirements  Sea Badge   Requirements  Explorer Achievement  Requirements  Silver World Award  Requirements  George Meany  Award   Requirements  General Information  In March of 1946 the Boy Scouts of America announced the first six square knot awards. These awards were to replace the ribbon bars that were being earned at the time. The list of knots has continued to grow. Some knots have been discontinued and others have been added. At present there are 34 knot awards. These awards are worn on the Scouting uniform in place of the plaque or large pendant that they represent.  Generally, the knot awards are worn by adult leaders. But there are a few that may be worn by youth members. Cub Scouts and Boy Scouts may wear the Universal Religious Emblem and the lifesaving and Meritorious Award knots. Explorers may display on their uniforms the same honors plus the Explorer Achievement Award knot.  Knots are sewn centered above the top seam of the left uniform shirt pocket, in rows of three. There is no order for wearing the knot awards. However, there is a proper way for each knot award to be displayed. The loop of the embroidered square knot that comes in front of the standing part is always to the wearer's right. Knots are worn with the distinguishing color (not white) toward the wearer's right.  Some knots are the same for training or service in different programs. For example, the Scouters Training Award knot is the same for service in Boy Scouting, Varsity Scouting and Exploring, Commissioner Service and District Committee. To distinguish the difference in programs a small device may be worn inside the knot for the appropriate program. If the knot award is earned in more than one program then more than one device should be worn.  RELIGIOUS EMBLEMS  Universal Religious Emblem (youth) - This knot is worn by any youth that has completed the requirements listed by their religion in literature related to the specific emblem. There are 47 emblems that may be earned from different religions.  Universal Religious Emblem (adult) - Adult that complete specific requirements of their faith may earn this award. At present 15 religions offer leader opportunities to earn religious emblems.  LIFESAVING AND MERITORIOUS ACTION  Honor Medal with Crossed Palms - The highest honor that can be bestowed to an individual. Awarded to youth or adults who have demonstrated both unusual heroism and skill while saving life or attempting to save a life at extreme risk to self. The knot is the same as the Honor Medal but the medallion has crossed palms.  Honor Medal - Awarded to youth or adults who have demonstrated unusual heroism and skill in saving a life or attempting to save a life at considerable risk to self. The recommendation form is the same for all four awards.  Heroism Award - Awarded to youth or adults who have demonstrated heroism and skill in saving or attempting to save a life with minimum risk to self.  Medal Of Merit - Earned by a youth or adult by performing an outstanding act of service and exceptional character by putting into practice scouting skills and ideals. It does not need to involve risk to self.  ACHIEVEMENT AWARDS  Arrow of Light - Adults who earned their
Nose: A whiff of salted almonds is overtaken by sherry – somewhere between Manzanilla and Fino – surprising, since this was matured solely in Oloroso. With warmth applied, the caramel-rich Oloroso starts to come through, with a hint of Brazil nut shell.  Palate: Starts off big with just a smidge of sweetness before the savoury Fino takes over. An almost saline note creeps through before moving into blue agave tequila, with a hint of lime zest bitterness.  Finish: Dries out, with freshly-shaved oak, Christmas spices, and a touch of pine. Very moreish.  Overall: A seriously grown-up whisky, miles away from a standard Glenfarclas - further even than the refill Bourbon matured Family Casks. Glenfarclas, usually an after-dinner treat, is firmly in the aperitif camp here. Superb with smoked almonds or sharp cheeses.
BERHAMPUR/BHUBANESWAR: A herd of five elephants and a foetus were mowed down after being hit by a speeding train near Subalaya in Ganjam district, about 50 km from Berhampur, on Saturday night. A 40-year-old man, engaged by a private contractor as a bed-roll assistant in the train, also died in the accident.The elephants — three females, a tusker and a calf besides a foetus — were killed after being hit by the Chennai-bound Coromondal superfast express at around 1 am, official sources said. A female elephant was in the advanced stages of pregnancy and the impact of the hit forced the foetus to come out. Ranjit Jena, a bed-roll assistant working with a Chennai-based private contractor, was also found dead, though it was still unclear as to how he died during the mishap, railway officers said.Divisional forest officer, Berhampur, S S Mishra said the elephants were crossing the tracks when the train hit them one after the other, killing them on the spot. Prior to the mishap, forest staff had driven out the herd from Dumanagiri jungle, he added. The DFO said around 20 elephants from Chandaka elephant sanctuary near Bhubaneswar had migrated to the area a few months ago. They were roaming in the Chilika wildlife division area and Khallikote range of Berhampur forest division after splitting into two to three groups. A herd comprising 12 elephants had crossed the railway track before the accident, he said.The accident, which marked the most number of pachyderm deaths in a railway mishap in Odisha, took place between Humma and Rambha railway stations (between Khurda Road and Berhampur) under the Khurda Road railway division of East Coast Railway (ECoR), possibly due to poor visibility caused by foggy conditions, official sources said.Train services between Berhampur and Bhubaneswar were disrupted on the fateful track for about seven hours after the accident as some portions of the line were damaged. "Railway services were restored at about 7.45 am after the track was repaired and the carcasses removed," said a railway officer. The Howrah-Chennai Coromondal Express also left the place and proceeded towards its destination after a halt at Berhampur station, where the partially damaged engine was replaced.Forest and environment minister Bijayshree Routray expressed shock over the mishap and said: "I have information that 10 days ago the range officer, Khallikote, had informed railway authorities that an elephant herd is likely to cross over the track anytime in the night. A month back the state government had also provided fluorescent signages reading 'elephant crossing zone', which railway officers had put up between the 10-km stretch connecting Rambha and Ganjam stations. Despite all this, such a tragedy took place." He said he has convened a meeting with railway officers on Monday and if required would urge chief minister Naveen Patnaik to take up the matter with the Centre.On May 18, a female elephant had died near the same spot after being hit by a goods train. Other animals, including a wild boar, have also been killed in train accidents in the area in recent times, sources said.
The second-best recorded shot was by British sniper Craig Harrison, which clocked in at 2,475 metres — just over 1.5 miles.  The incredible shot, first reported by the Globe & Mail, took place sometime in the last month. One military source told the paper that there isn't much doubt about the significance of the shot. "This is an incredible feat. It is a world record that might never be equalled."  The kill puts Canada back on the top spot of the world's best snipers, a position that Canada is no stranger to. As of today, Canada holds the first, third, and fourth spots for the longest distance confirmed kills by a sniper.  The unnamed soldier killed an Islamic State fighter from 3,540 metres away, the Canadian Armed Forces confirmed to VICE News — that's about 2.2 miles. He took the shot from an apartment building somewhere in Iraq.  A sniper with Canada's elite special forces unit, the Canadian military's answer to Seal Team Six, has smashed the world record for the longest confirmed kill.  Read more  A sniper with Canada's elite special forces unit, the Canadian military's answer to Seal Team Six, has smashed the world record for the longest confirmed kill.  The unnamed soldier killed an Islamic State fighter from 3,540 metres away, the Canadian Armed Forces confirmed to VICE News — that's about 2.2 miles. He took the shot from an apartment building somewhere in Iraq.  The kill puts Canada back on the top spot of the world's best snipers, a position that Canada is no stranger to. As of today, Canada holds the first, third, and fourth spots for the longest distance confirmed kills by a sniper.  The incredible shot, first reported by the Globe & Mail, took place sometime in the last month. One military source told the paper that there isn't much doubt about the significance of the shot. "This is an incredible feat. It is a world record that might never be equalled."  The second-best recorded shot was by British sniper Craig Harrison, which clocked in at 2,475 metres — just over 1.5 miles.  The Canadian sniper didn't do it alone, however — the sniper units work in pairs. One scoping the target, the other taking the shot. The Globe reported that the rifle used was a McMillan TAC-50.  A McMillan TAC-50.  Canada is in Iraq under an "advise and assist" mission, stationed in Erbil, aiding the Kurdish Peshmerga forces in Northern Iraq. The mission has taken on a greater significance as of recent months, as coalition forces battle to regain Mosul from the Islamic State.  The training is being conducted by the Canadian Special Operations Regiment and the smaller, more elite, Joint Task Force 2 — one of the world's best trained special forces units.  Beyond training, the Canadian forces have been known to engage IS targets in support of their Peshmerga allies.  "Instead of dropping a bomb that could potentially kill civilians in the area, it is a very precise application of force and because it was so far way, the bad guys didn't have a clue what was happening," a military source told the Globe.  A statement from the Canadian Armed Forces, sent to VICE News, reads that the Canadian soldiers "do not accompany leading combat elements, but enable the Iraqi security forces who are in a tough combat mission. "  The training mission was expanded by the Trudeau government after they ended the bombing mission against IS targets in Iraq and Syria.
Rocket to Your Doom Image Cost Build time Reward Sell price Conformity increase Availability Unique? Dimensions - D x W 80 65 70 6s 80 Consumerism +20 SciFi  Premium This Thanksgiving's Gone to the Birds!  Premium (Cyber Monday Box) This Thanksgiving's Gone to the Birds!  Premium (Building Box) 12 x 12 Task Time Reward /h /h Providing Long-Distance Travel Solutions 4h 135, 15 33.75 3.75
Longmont police are looking for a 30-year-old Longmont man accused in an unprovoked attack of his neighbor, who suffered serious injuries, early Wednesday morning.  Kurt Severen Olson Jones was last seen leaving the Longmont area southbound on Interstate 25 from Colo. Highway 119 at about 3:20 p.m., according to police. Jones is wanted on a warrant on suspicion of second-degree assault with a deadly weapon, second-degree assault causing serious bodily injury and aggravated robbery, Longmont Police Cmdr. Jeff Satur noted in a police bulletin released to the media on Wednesday evening. The warrant carries a $75,000 bond.  Jones  Jones holed up in his home at 2130 Meadow Court on Wednesday morning after police were called to the area on a report of a fight. A second call about a disturbance led officers to his porch, where they found a broken window on the home and a cell phone abandoned on the porch.  The victim, identified as a 48-year-old man and a neighbor of Jones, was taken to Longmont United Hospital for treatment.  "It was a pretty violent assault, a pretty serious assault," Satur said.  The victim told police he was walking home from work when he was attacked and strangled. He told police he did not know the man who attacked him. His "vascular injuries" were so severe that police were initially calling the attack an attempted murder, although the arrest warrant does not include the charge.  After Jones holed up in his fourplex, Longmont SWAT officers were called to the scene to assist.  The Longmont SWAT team surrounded the home and officers began trying to negotiate with Jones, but Satur said he was uncooperative and wouldn't emerge or allow officers inside his home.  "Negotiations is kind of a strong word," Satur said, because "we did all the talking" and weren't getting any response from the resident.  Because the victim could not initially identify Jones as his attacker, police backed off of his home to continue their investigation. Jones eventually emerged and spoke with detectives after noon, Satur said.  Police obtained the arrest warrant later on Wednesday afternoon.  Area facilities that had been placed on lockdown resumed normal operations late Wednesday morning once the SWAT call out was withdrawn.  He said he couldn't specifically address Jones' mental health condition or police record because of lack of probable cause in the investigation as it stood early Wednesday afternoon.  "There is some history there, and I cant' really go into the details at this point," he said. "If we were able to make an arrest we may be able to release that information."  Jones is described as a white man, 5-feet, 6-inches tall with brown hair and hazel eyes. He was last seen leaving Longmont in a red Mustang GT with Colorado Disabled Veteran license plate 296-XAF.  "We will be watching the suspects home and will try and convince him to turn himself in," Satur wrote in an email to media on Wednesday evening.  Anyone with information about Jones' whereabouts is asked to call the Longmont Police Department at 303-651-8501 or Northern Colorado Crime Stoppers at 1-800-222-8477 (TIPS). Anonymous tips may be left online at nococrimestoppers.com and text message tips may be sent to 274637 with keyword NOCO in the body.
The legal drinking age in Canada is the minimum age at which a person is allowed to buy and drink alcohol, and right now it is 18 for Alberta, Manitoba and Québec and 19 for the rest of the country. In Canada, each province and territory determines its own legal drinking age.  Legal Drinking Age in Canada's Provinces and Territories  Alberta - 18  British Columbia - 19  Manitoba - 18  New Brunswick - 19  Newfoundland and Labrador - 19  Northwest Territories - 19  Nova Scotia - 19  Nunavut - 19  Ontario - 19  Prince Edward Island - 19  Québec - 18  Saskatchewan - 19  Yukon Territory - 19  Growing Concern About Alcohol Overconsumption  A growing problem of rising and overconsumption of alcohol, particularly among young adults just at the legal drinking age, has raised alarms in Canada.  Since about 2000 and the release of the Canada Low-Risk Alcohol Drinking Guidelines in 2011, the first such national guidelines, many Canadians have been on a mission to reduce alcohol consumption across the board. Much research has been done on how harmful even moderate alcohol consumption can be and the serious long-term effects on young adults ages 18/19–24, when risky alcohol consumption peaks.  The Effect of Canadian Drinking-Age Laws on Young Males  A 2014 study by a scientist with the University of Northern British Columbia (UNBC) Faculty of Medicine concludes that Canada's drinking-age laws have a significant impact on youth mortality.  Writing in the international journal "Drug and Alcohol Dependence," Dr. Russell Callaghan, a UNBC Associate Professor of Psychiatry, argues that, when compared to Canadian males slightly younger than the minimum legal drinking age, young men who are just older than the drinking age have significant and abrupt increases in mortality, especially from injuries and motor vehicle accidents.  "This evidence demonstrates that drinking-age legislation has a significant effect on reducing mortality among youth, especially young males," says Dr. Callaghan.  Currently, the minimum legal drinking age is 18 years of age in Alberta, Manitoba, and Québec, and 19 in the rest of the country. Using national Canadian death data from 1980 to 2009, researchers examined the causes of deaths of individuals who died between 16 and 22 years of age. They found that immediately following the minimum legal drinking age, male deaths due to injuries rose sharply by 10 to 16 percent, and male deaths due to motor vehicle accidents increased suddenly by 13 to 15 percent.  Increases in mortality appeared, too, immediately following the legislated drinking age for 18-year-old females, but these jumps were relatively small.  According to the research, increasing the drinking age to 19 in Alberta, Manitoba, and Québec would prevent seven deaths of 18-year-old men each year. Raising the drinking age to 21 across the country would prevent 32 annual deaths of male youth 18 to 20 years old.  "Many provinces, including British Columbia, are undertaking alcohol-policy reforms," Dr. Callaghan said. "Our research shows that there are substantial social harms associated with youth drinking. These adverse consequences need to be carefully considered when we develop new provincial alcohol policies. I hope these results will help inform the public and policymakers in Canada about the serious costs associated with hazardous drinking among young people."  High Canadian Alcohol Prices Tempt Importers  There has been a movement to encourage lower consumption by increasing or maintaining the overall price of alcohol through interventions such as excise taxes and indexing prices to inflation. Such pricing, according to the Canadian Center on Substance Abuse, would "encourage production and consumption of lower-strength" alcoholic beverages. Establishing minimum prices, the CCSA said, could "remove inexpensive sources of alcohol often favored by young adults and other high-risk drinkers."  Higher prices are seen as a disincentive to youth drinking, but lower-priced alcohol is readily available across the border in the United States.  Both visitors and Canadians are tempted to bring in large quantities of alcoholic beverages bought in the United States, which can be about half the price of such drinks in Canada.  How Much Duty-Free Alcohol Can Canadians and Visitors Bring to Canada?​  If you are a Canadian or a visitor to Canada, you are allowed to bring a small quantity of alcohol (wine, liquor, beer or coolers) into the country without having to pay duty or taxes as long as:  the alcohol accompanies you  you meet the minimum legal drinking age for the province or territory at which you enter Canada.  Canadians and visitors may bring in only one of the following. If larger quantities are imported, the entire amount will assess duties, not just the amount exceeding these duty-free quantities:  1.5 liters (50.7 US fluid ounces) of wine, including wine coolers over 0.
As I'm sure we've hammered home every day for the past week now: The Boston Bruins hockey club is hurt. And badly.  What we haven't done, is illustrate just how bad it is using some good ol' visual aides.  Thankfully, our dear friend Chris tends to come up with great ways to visualize hockey events, news, play, and rosters.  And boy...what a beat up roster they're currently icing:  So much to unpack here:  As a whole, they've missed over a season's worth of injuries cumulatively.  The backup, who hasn't even played in X amount of games, lost 5 due to undisclosed injuries behind the scenes.  Every line has been affected in some way. every. single. line.  To say nothing of the top six, who've taken an absolute clobbering with a combined 33 games cumulatively.  Wondering where all the faceoff wins might go in the middle of a period? Look no further than the Center depth, which had almost 30 cumulative games lost.  As you can see, the current cap relief for players on IR is almost at 4 million. For comparison, that's almost like paying for a whole Matt Beleskey to sit around and not do anything....Wait.  Cumulatively, the total missed ice time of all these players adds up to two weeks plus an added few hours. Total missed time on ice was calculated using the average between this year and last years TOI/gm, then multiplied by games played. Goaltenders skew this somewhat, especially Khudobin since he would have at most started one game in that span  And if you need an even more comprehensive look, here's the injury list, game by game.  Not. A single. Game. Played. Without. A hurt. Player. Many without Boston's second or third line center and a lot more coming without their backup for either. That's insane.  If we look at Bergeron, Krejci, Spooner, and Backes as the Bruins defacto 'top nine' centers, with Backes sliding over when one is hurt, the Bruins have played exactly one game with more than two of them, during the game against Vancouver. Krejci would not play in the third period that game due to injury, and Backes was playing on the wing. The past six games (after Backes's colon surgery) have seen just Bergeron from that list of four centers, and the rest having either Krejci and Spooner, or Bergeron and Backes. Despite being asked to carry the load himself, Bergeron has played out of his mind.  Comparing the Bruins injury woes to the rest of the league doesn't make it any better. They rank second to the Anaheim Ducks in terms of cap hit lost due to injury, and third overall in terms of just forward injuries, behind Anaheim, and just behind Minnesota. the chart below really highlights:  1. The Ducks are really hurt, and in every phase. Getzlaf, Kesler, Vatanen, Fowler, everyone  2. The Bruins are catching up! Pulling away from the rest of the pack now! #StriveForGreatness  Now, thankfully, some of these injured players are finally starting to come back. Krejci practiced for the first time yesterday without the no contact jersey, and hopes to be back sometime this west coast trip. Acciari's back from the IR and skating in a depth role again. But it will still be at least December or maybe 2018 before we can see fully what this team is actually supposed to look like under default conditions.  Until then, it's up to Don Sweeney and Coach Cassidy to balance the lineup for the foreseeable future, and that does indeed involve a lot of the Providence roster.  You can take a look at the original graph made by Chris here.  Some injury info was used from NHL Injury Viz. Its a great website that has injuries broken down by team and player, as well as injury type, with everything filterable, and updated weekly. You can play around on the site here, or browse their twitter feed here. Further explanations can be found here  .
Image copyright Reuters Image caption Former British PM Tony Blair was speaking to a French radio station  Tony Blair has said he thinks Scotland will leave the Union if the UK votes to break away from the European Union.  The ex-PM said he hoped voters in the forthcoming referendum would choose to stay a part of the 28-member bloc.  And speaking to French radio, he added: "In my opinion... if the United Kingdom votes to leave Europe, Scotland will vote to leave the United Kingdom".  Earlier, the UK government tabled a motion in the House Commons setting out some of the rules for the referendum.  There had been speculation Prime Minister Cameron was preparing for a vote as soon as June if his renegotiation plans were approved by European leaders next month.  The UK government will hold a vote on membership by the end of 2017.  'Trigger demand'  On Sunday, Scotland's First Minister Nicola Sturgeon said a June EU referendum would be "disrespectful" given the number of elections in May.  She also repeated her belief that a UK vote to leave the EU, but a Scottish vote to stay, would lead to an "overwhelming demand" for a second independence referendum.  Following Mr Blair's radio interview, SNP MP Stephen Gethins said his party believed it "unacceptable for Scotland to be dragged out of the EU against its will".  He added: "If Scotland is taken out of the EU against its will then obviously there will have been a fundamental breakdown in what should be a partnership of nations and it is highly likely that this would trigger an overwhelming demand for a second Scottish independence referendum."
Why some gay men should worry more about their maturity than their masculinity  I don't tend to expect enlightenment from gay hook-up apps, but I was struck by the words I read recently on one man's profile.  'My dad taught me that a real man is someone who makes others feel comfortable in their presence.'  What an admirable quality to aim for: to make others feel comfortable and at ease around one's self. How many of us consciously or unconsciously strive for that?  To make others feel comfortable shows compassion and kindness: two qualities not linked very often with masculinity.  Instead, masculinity is linked with 'courage', 'strength', the impulse to hold it all together and not talk about our feelings.  Most of us know how toxic notions of masculinity can be. Statistics show suicide to be the number one killer of young men in many nations. Men who tried too hard to hold it all together or didn't think they could ask for help.  Gay men, in particular, struggle with notions of masculinity.  We often grow up in societies that tell us we are the antithesis of masculine. Sometimes this leads to over-compensation. We adopt 'straight-acting' personas or hyper-masculine clothing, as if to say, 'Look, I'm just as much of a man as anyone else!'  Thinking more on those profile words though, it occurred to me that 'making others feel comfortable' shouldn't be a 'man' trait.  The writer's father no doubt came from a more gentlemanly age: one defined by gender-specific manners. Today, gender lines are crumbling. Trans models feature on the cover of fashion magazines. Toy stores are eliminating 'boys' and 'girls' sections. High-street clothing retailers are following suit.  'Making others feel comfortable' is not a 'man', 'woman' or non-binary thing, but surely just a sign of maturity? Something we all, as adults, should strive for.  But we don't. Some people feel empowered to intimidate others. Some people get a kick out of putting others down. Others can't wait to point out the faults or shortcomings of friends or acquaintances, whether their criticism was sought or not.  Again, sometimes gay people are guilty here. In fact, for a whole raft of reasons, often rooted in poor self-esteem, internalized homophobia or shame, I've known gay men to behave in a very immature fashion.  The 'bitchy queen' stereotype exists for a reason.  I've been there myself.  Of course, behaving in an immature fashion is not the preserve of LGBTI people. Successful individuals and powerful figures across society — even world leaders! — can behave with a shocking lack of maturity at times.  That's when it occurred to me: rather than getting tangled up in whether I'm masculine enough, or manly enough, the bigger challenge is whether I'm behaving with maturity.  Anyone can 'act' straight. It's much harder to resist our more childish impulses.  Did I behave like a man? Or did I behave like an adult?  Rather than promoting yourself as 'Masc4Masc', you may be surprised how much more of a catch you are if you strive to behave simply like a compassionate grown-up.  @davidhudson_uk
It is a lot of money, but what does £694.89bn really buy you in 2012?  Guardian Data's annual audit of UK government spending this year shows huge cuts taking place across supposedly protected areas of government as the austerity programme hits home.  Public spending in 2011-12 was £694.89bn - compared to £689.63bn in 2010-11. That may look like an increase but once inflation is taken into account, it is a real-terms cut of 1.58%, or £10.8bn.  However, that £10.8bn cut masks big drops in spending in over 40 government departments and quangos, including 'protected' areas such as health and education. We have identified 45 departments or non-departmental public bodies with cuts in spending - those groups have suffered £72bn cuts in real terms in a single year, equivalent to around 10% of annual spending.  Thanks to Guardian graphic artist Jenny Ridley, we can see how that spending fits together - and how anything less than a billion is really not that much in government terms - particularly compared to a budget deficit of £121.4bn for 2011-12.  Explore the graphic  The data - for the financial year 2011-12 - is the first time this year's information has been collected in a single place. The official Treasury report, PESA, publishes some of this data but not at the same level of detail.  Each year every government department publishes an annual report which includes detailed breakdowns of spending. These are what we have gone through to get the key numbers for you. [If you want to do it yourself, there's a little guide to how to find it at the bottom of this article.]  • Education: down by 5.7% in real terms. The government had pledged to protect the education budget from the cuts and had added the pupil premium to help poorer children. However, the annual reports clearly show DFE spending going from £58.28bn to £56.27bn - a cut even before inflation is taken into account. Within the education budget, there have been big cuts to schools infrastructure (-81%, largely as a result of the scrapping Building Schools for Future programme) and Children, Young People and Families (-17%, with big cuts to Sure Start). The schools budget - excluding academies - is down by 4.31% to £46.2bn, while academies have had a 191% increase to £5.3bn as more schools convert. The pupil premium, at £556m is only equivalent to 1% of the overall education budget. It's also worth noting education secretary Michael Gove's hard-hitting civil servant cuts.  • Business, Innovation and Skills - cut by 7.9% with big drops across universities, FE colleges and science. In particular it shows higher education cut by 7%, further education by 18% and science & research slashed by 6%  • The Department of Health - another protected area - has not kept up with inflation, with a -1.2% change in its budget after inflation [although it's worth reading this note from the Department of Health to their published totals].  Whatever the case, spending on the NHS is down by 0.9% in real terms with cuts of 1.17% in primary care and 1% in dental services. However, there have been rises in hospital spending, A&E and community health care. The PESA NHS (Health) numbers suggest that total NHS DEL increased by 0.02% in real terms in 2011-12, although this comprises a 0.5% increase in Resource DEL and an 11.2% cut in capital DEL. This probably suggests that there is some NHS money that is not being channeled through the Department of Health? Or is it because DEL is only part of overall spending?   UPDATE: The chair of the UK statistics authority Andrew Dilnot, following a complaint by the shadow health secretary, Andy Burnham, said he "concludes that expenditure on the NHS in real terms was lower in 2011-12 than it was in 2009-10".   He has asked Hunt to "clarify" statements on the Conservative website claiming "we have increased the NHS budget in real terms in each of the last two years". Hunt himself told MPs on 23 October that "real-terms spending on the NHS has increased across the country".  • Ministry of Justice - down nearly 11% with big real term cuts to spending on courts (-23%), prisons (-15.61%), Criminal Injuries Compensation (-46%) and the Youth Justice Board (-18.92%). Civil legal aid, however, is still increasing despite reforms - up by 1.5%  • Home Office - down 5.4%, including cuts to the UK Border Agency (since reformed into a new Border Force) of 21.65% and Police (-6.64%)  • Communities & Local Government - down by 15
the legal might of the government  Recent Examples on the Web: Noun  With all your heart, and all your soul, and all your might. Harry Bruinius, The Christian Science Monitor, "In Plains, Ga., an evangelical politician like no other," 11 July 2018  Shahnawaz believes that her brother was coerced into a false confession and that his detention might had been racially motivated. refinery29.com, "Why Was A Pakistani 23-Year-Old Detained Despite Having A Student Visa?," 11 July 2018  In truth, the United States has long used its diplomatic might to subordinate global public health to entrenched corporate interests. Eric Levitz, Daily Intelligencer, "It's Normal for the U.S. to Put Corporate Profits Above Babies' Health," 10 July 2018  On Monday, five-time champion Brazil flexed its might and ended Mexico's summer campaign despite Neymar's unnecessary theatrics, while Belgium bounced back from a two-goal deficit to upend Japan in a furious World Cup classic. Editors, USA TODAY, "Fourth of July travel, Thailand cave search, World Cup: 5 things to know Tuesday," 3 July 2018  In the end, Lionsgate, which is behind the Wick movies, flexed its might, wanting to keep Stahelski in is fold. Borys Kit, The Hollywood Reporter, "'John Wick' Director, 'Colony' Creator Tackle Comic Book 'Analog' for Lionsgate (Exclusive)," 22 May 2018  Perhaps awed by its own might, America backtracked, offering the firm a partial reprieve. The Economist, "America must use sanctions cautiously," 19 May 2018  The Warriors did it without showing all of their offensive might. Jonathan Feigen, Houston Chronicle, "Warriors rip home-court advantage from Rockets with Game 1 win," 15 May 2018  This is all taking place among a fraught political background as U.S. teachers are solidifying their political might. Andrew Craft, Fox News, "School districts increasingly hiring foreign teachers to fill shortages," 14 May 2018  These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'might.' Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback.
Corzine and Obama campaign ad.  A match made in donation bundling Heaven.  This clip from a 2010 Jon Corzine for Governor campagin ad is exhibit A in the cesspool of DOJ corruption that has resulted in Jon Corzine not currently residing in prison for stealing $1.6 billion from segregated client accounts during the collapse of MF Global, a collapse that was brought on by at least $6 billion of massively-leveraged bets on European debt.  ---  James Koutoulas: "If anyone still thinks Obma has kept his promise to clean up Wall Street please review the following video."  Justice For Sale  President Obama took over $49 million in campaign donations from Wall Street, his Justice Department is full of former white collar defense lawyers, and 4 years after our financial collapse, not a single senior Wall Street executive has been charged with a crime.  CORZINED - Urban Dictionary  When something of value is stolen, and everyone who was in charge of safeguarding the valuable claims ignorance of just about anything. People in charge who confronted with questions about the valuable items usually answer, "I just dont know where it is" or claim that the valuables were "vaporized" when it was their job to know.  --  Wall Street justice brought to you by Eric Holder and Covington & Burling:  Who is Jon Corzine - CNN:  Good clip exposing Corzine's Obama connection. A look at the career of former MF Global CEO Jon Corzine as he moved from Goldman Sachs titan to Washington power broker.  These two links search for the missing funds:  Janet Tavakoli - Analyzing the Fraud at MF Global  Email Ties Corzine to Missing Funds - WSJ
As a WGU graduate, this community is for you. Here, you will find:  alumni-specific perks  continuing education opportunities  ways to network and speak out  State University alumni news and events  every detail for commencement  If your question isn't answered below, we have a team who can help! Simply email or call a member of the Alumni Relations team at 385-428-2085.   I'm new to alumni. How do I register on this site?  Once a graduation application has been submitted and cleared by the Student Records Office, you are officially a WGU Alum.  To register for this site, simply click on the "Login" button in the top, right corner. You will log in with the same username and password used on your portal.   I'm a recent graduate and need information on either a state or national commencement.  First - congrats!  Second - Find more information about registration, date/time, and day-of details on the WGU Commencement page. View this page for more information.  You can also call the Alumni Relations team and ask for commencement information: 866.895.9660 Ext. 2085   I forgot my Student ID number. How do I retrieve it?  Contact the Alumni Relations team. Per the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA), graduates must verify personal identity information before we can release their Student ID number.  Email the Alumni Relations team for your Student ID.   How long does it take to receive my diploma after graduating?  WGU Diplomas are mailed to the graduate within 10-15 business days (pending any financial hold on the student account), to the address indicated on the graduation application. If you have not received your diploma within this time period, please contact the Graduation Clearance team in the Student Records Office.   How do I order additional copies of my diploma?   To order a duplicate diploma using a credit or debit card, or a web check, please log into your WGU Student Portal. Once there, click on the "Student Support" tab, then the "Financial Services" link. Locate the "Financial Toolbox" and click on the "Pay Fees or Purchase Items" link. A new page should open up, and there you can find the "Duplicate Diploma - WGU Graduate Only" link.   How do I change the name on my diploma?   You can email records@wgu.edu requesting to change your name and they will ask for proof of your name change so that it can be officially changed on your record and then it will reflect on your diploma. If you have already received your diploma and wish to change your name on it, you would go through the same process but you may need to purchase a new diploma- which is $10.   How long do I maintain access to my WGU student email account?  WGU alumni maintain access to their WGU email accounts even after graduating. To access your email account, login to your WGU Student Portal, and click on the "Mail" icon in the top, right-hand corner. If you are unable to login to the Student Portal, you can reset your password by going to https://my.wgu.edu and clicking on the "Reset Password" link. For additional help in accessing the Student Portal, please contact the WGU IT Service Desk at 877.435.7948.   I need an official WGU transcript.  Visit Transcript Request, Official WGU.   I need an unofficial WGU transcript.  You can access and download your unofficial WGU transcript from within the Student Portal.  Once logged in, proceed to the "Student Support" tab. There you will be able to "Download an Unofficial Transcript."   I'm applying to another university for a graduate or terminal degree program. What should I expect; will they accept my WGU degree?  Officially, you should read this.  For your curiosity (and our bragging rights), we share a list of secondary universities who we know have accepted WGU grads.  Note: WGU graduates have self-reported being accepted to this list of universities for their continued education. Share yours if it's not represented!   Need Placement File Service for Education?  Most school districts no longer require university placement files and have an online application process in place that allows applicants to upload their own files. However, WGU offers placement file services to students and graduates from the Teachers College if a school district specifically requests a placement file be sent directly from the applicant's university. For more information on this service, please visit https://alumni.wgu.edu/universityfile or contact the WGU Records Department at records@wgu.edu.   I need a copy of my 10
Classic, yet contemporary. Theoretical, yet applied. McClave & Sincich's Statistics gives you the best of both worlds. This text offers a trusted, comprehensive introduction to statistics that emphasizes inference and integrates real data throughout. The authors stress the development of statistical thinking, the assessment of credibility, and value of the inferences made from data.   The Twelfth Edition infuses a new focus on ethics, which is critically important when working with statistical data. Chapter Summaries have a new, study-oriented design, helping students stay focused when preparing for exams. Data, exercises, technology support, and Statistics in Action cases are updated throughout the book.
Still loading...  A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z AA AB AC AD AE AF AG AH AI AJ AK AL AM AN AO AP AQ AR AS AT AU AV AW AX AY AZ BA BB 1 Alexander Hamilton Aaron Burr, SIr My Shot The Story of Tonight The Schuyler Sisters Farmer Refuted You'll Be Back Right Hand Man A Winter's Ball Helpless Satisfied The Story of Tonight (Reprise) Wait For It Stay Alive Ten Duel Commandments Meet Me Inside That Would Be Enough Guns And Ships History Has Its Eyes On You Yorktown What Comes Next Dear Theodosia Non-Stop What'd I Miss Cabinet Battle #1 Take A Break Say No To This The Room Where It Happens Schuyler Defeated Cabinet Balle #2 Washington On Your Side One Last Time I Know Him The Adams Administration We Know Hurricane The Reynolds Pamphlet Burn Blow Us All Away Stay Alive (Reprise) It's Quiet Uptown The Election of 1800 Your Obiedient Servant Best of Wives, Best of Women The World Was Wide Enough Who Lives, Who Dies, Who Tells Your Story 2 Alexander Hamilton x 3 Aaron Burr, Sir x 4 My Shot 5 The Story of Tonight 6 The Schuyler Sisters 7 Farmer Refuted 8 You'll Be Back 9 Right Hand Man 10 A Winter's Ball 11 Helpless 12 Satisfied 13 The Story of Tonight (Reprise) 14 Wait For It 15 Stay Alive 16 Ten Duel Commandments 17 Meet Me Inside 18 That Would Be Enough 19 Guns and Ships 20 History Has It's Eyes On You 21 Yorktown 22 What Comes Next 23 Dear Theodosia 24 Non-Stop 25 What'd I Miss 26 Cabinet Battle #1 27 Take A Break 28 Say No To This 29 The Room Where It Happens 30 Schuyler Defeated 31 Cabinet Battle #2 32 Washington On Your Side 33 One Last Time 34 I Know Him 35 The Adam's Administration 36 We Know 37 Hurricane 38 The Reynolds Pamphlet 39 Burn 40 Blow Us All Away 41 Stay Alive (Reprise) 42 It's Quiet Uptown 43 The Election of 1800 44 Your Obiedient Servant 45 Best of Wives, Best of Women 46 The World Was Wide Enough 47 Who Lives, Who Dies, Who Tells Your Story 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100  Loading... Loading...  Quotes are not sourced from all markets and may be delayed up to 20 minutes. Information is provided 'as is' and solely for informational purposes, not for trading purposes or advice.Disclaimer Sheet1  A browser error has occurred.  Please press Ctrl-F5 to refresh the page and try again.  A browser error has occurred.  Please hold the Shift key and click the Refresh button to try again.
It comes apart in the middle, at the ball and near the panel. The pieces will easily slide into the back pocket of a Domke F2 bag, for instance. The ball is a ribbed sphere, so is strong and functional without any appreciable weight. This lightness is important as it is flying out away from the camera and would otherwise be fatiguingly torqued. It Goes Both Ways Horizontal or vertical—doesn't matter, just rotate the camera. If the ball is at upper camera left for horizontal (as if you were hand-holding the flash yourself) a 90-degree camera rotation (primary shutter release now on the bottom right) puts the card on the upper right. Still fine. No adjustment needed. Weather Or Not Rain will not be an issue if outside. Nothing on it appears to be affected by moisture. The bounce card it corroplast, and is available in several different printed versions (white, silver, gold, zebra, yada, yada.) You Can Mix It Up With Overspray If you are in a small room you can concentrate the flash's beam to the card. Or go wide-beam and let a lot of energy go past the card to hit the wall and create fill light. The card (i.e., your key) can be warmed independent of the room's natural bouncing surface. So, What's the Light Like? It's a run-and-gun mod, rather than something for finely crafting light. Think big bounce card (but up and over about 18 inches) and you'll be close. And it's completely self-contained, and thus what every camera-topped fongsphere user should probably have on instead when they are working outside with no walls or ceilings. (I see those guys, and a reeeeally want to walk up and say something. But I have learned to just shut up and watch.) Not being a wedding/event shooter (I'm more of a controlled-light portrait shooter) this thing is a little out of my wheel house. But Ben is starting a new soccer season at GK this Saturday so I grabbed him and took him outside for a quick test drive photo. Mind you, this would most likely be used indoors—events, party pics, etc. But I wanted to see if it would hold up as a close, on-camera light source for an outside portrait. Verdict: Not too bad, actually. I am exposing for the sky and flashing Ben so I have no fill. Remember, this is a single on-camera flash. But the quality of light is pretty decent. Efficiency-wise, this mod is more of an indoor cat, as you couldn't really fight full sun with it. (We were out in the evening, so we were fine.) Obviously, it works in either manual or TTL, depending on your normal preference. As a portrait shooter I gravitate towards manual. I suspect most event shooters will skew towards TTL. Both work well. Please don't tell McNally I tried TTL, tho. Here it is in use. As far as that Faces of Death " Where'd that second camera perspective come from? " thing, suffice to say there were a few PocketWizards involved. I triggered the BTS camera from my PW'd primary camera's shutter (via the PC jack->PW) and then had my primary camera's flash PW'd to the BTS camera's PW, which was code-hopped so we could do all of this with three units. No worries, as I have done this multi-camera-sync thing before. __________ The Bounce-Wall, by California Sunbounce, debuts at Photokina this month. If you are there, they will have them in their booth to play with. Price is still TBA. UPDATE: Price is expected to be $99 (in dollars or Euros).
Back in November, CBS Home Entertainment released a three-season repackage of the remastered Star Trek: The Original Series on DVD, and this week they've announced a new series of releases coming this June for TOS on Blu-ray, as well as box sets for Star Trek: The Next Generation on DVD and Blu-ray as well.  The Blu-ray collection for Star Trek: The Original Series contains all twenty discs from the 2009 high-definition release in one box, with all of the bonus material and other features included. Like the first releases, the discs contain both the "classic" and "remastered" visual effects which can be each viewed independently. The set is projected for sale at $99.99.  Star Trek: The Next Generation gets a fourth-round DVD release in this new box set. We've confirmed that these are not, as some have hoped, a DVD release of the remastered edition of the series, but this collection features the same 48-disc standard-definition masters as the original 2002 arrival.  In addition, this set also leaves out the 2007 bonus disc contained in the Twentieth Anniversary box set.  Finally, the one thing many fans in North American have been waiting for: an all-in-one collection of Star Trek: The Next Generation on Blu-ray. While we've been touting availability (and economic savings) of the region-free UK box set that's been available since December 2014, we know there are those of you who didn't want to import the collection from overseas.  This 48-disc set will have all the discs that were released as part of the individual season sets, but will not feature the Season 3 visual effects feature exclusive to Best Buy, nor will it contain the five standalone discs ("The Best of Both Worlds," "Redemption," "Unification," "Chain of Command," or "All Good Things…") or their respective bonus material. The set will retail at suggested price of $208.99.  Preorders aren't available yet, but we'll update this post once they're live.  * * *  With yet another release of The Next Generation on DVD following just two years after the last one – and with a low price point of just $144.99 (compared to earlier editions, anyhow) – it remains odd that both Deep Space Nine (retailing on Amazon for over $500) and Voyager (at around $300 for the series) have never seen a second round on DVD since their original sale dates in 2003 and 2004.  Unfortunately, we've confirmed that right now, there are no plans for new DVD box sets for the two spin-off series, though as usual, we've been told that sales of these new June collections may determine if either show might get another chance on DVD. At this point, that would be the only hope to see the shows on store shelves again, as their upgrade to HD is now nothing more than a wish list item.  We'll be sure to keep you all posted as we learn more about these releases, the upcoming 4K remaster of The Wrath of Khan, and the Blu-ray upgrade for The Animated Series coming later this year.
Black Pete: Documentary shows how people in UK, including Russell Brand, respond to 'racist' Dutch Christmas tradition BelfastTelegraph.co.uk A documentary about a Dutch Christmas tradition which involves white people wearing blackface has revealed what people in the UK think of this controversial figure, and has fuelled the debate on a custom that is perceived by many to be unacceptably racist. https://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/news/uk/black-pete-documentary-shows-how-people-in-uk-including-russell-brand-respond-to-racist-dutch-christmas-tradition-30800871.html https://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/news/world-news/article30508928.ece/7ea81/AUTOCROP/h342/PANews%20BT_P-818b70a1-9b03-4db0-9d3a-ef423fa40235_I1.jpg  Email  A documentary about a Dutch Christmas tradition which involves white people wearing blackface has revealed what people in the UK think of this controversial figure, and has fuelled the debate on a custom that is perceived by many to be unacceptably racist.  The film shows two Black Petes wearing blackface, an Afro-wig and golden earrings strolling through a London park, going about their traditional job of handing out sweets as they would do in The Netherlands, whilst the camera crew capture onlookers' reactions.  Today is the culmination of the Dutch Sinterklaas season. Children receive their presents, and Santa and his helpers return to their fictional home in Spain after visiting for a couple of weeks. These helpers are the Black Petes; mostly played by white people in blackface, and represented as jolly, acrobatic and prone to making mistakes.  Russell Brand is amongst the perplexed Brits appearing in the documentary, offering his view on the customary garb and the sweets, which include a black marzipan face with red lips which stretch from ear to ear.  "What this tradition does, is it dehumanises people that are of a different ethnicity and it reduces them to a lower status of either toys or a degenerative role as servants," Mr Brand told the Petes and the audience back in the Netherlands.  "In this country we think of Holland as a very advanced nation with advanced social principles, so it's very surprising to see this kind of tradition", he said.  Other Londoners reacted with disbelief, anger and even threats of physical violence.  The full documentary, created by popular filmmaker and writer Sunny Bergman, was broadcast on Dutch national television this week and has become a major talking point throughout the country.  Ms Bergman took the Petes on a trip to the UK because she wanted to see the reactions of people who don't have personal childhood memories of them.  The documentary also includes a second experiment, this time in a park in The Netherlands. The set-up involved three men attempting to rob a bike in broad daylight. They all dressed identically and were of the same build, but one was black, one Middle-Eastern, and one white.  The black man and the Middle-Eastern man were both questioned by passers-by, and the police were called to the scene a number of times in both cases. The white man, however, was offered help by two separate bystanders, who came to his aid with bolt cutters so he could free what they assumed was his own bike.  When members of the public were asked why they didn't show any concern that the white man was sawing away at the lock, they explained that he was probably a father, and they themselves have been in the position where they have forgotten their key. Others, when questioned about their response to the black and Middle-Eastern men, said they were too scared to confront them, because they thought they might get attacked.  Further shocking footage shows the arrest of anti-Black Pete campaigner Quinsy Gario in 2011. He trailblazed the open criticism of the tradition by attending a Sinterklaas parade wearing a T-shirt that read: 'Black Pete is racism'. For this, he was violently arrested. The film shows him lying on the floor shouting: "I am being hit! I am being kicked! I didn't do anything!"  Although the discussion surrounding the Black Petes is very much alive, they still have a strong fanbase. A Facebook petition dubbed the "Pietitie" (Piet being the Dutch name for Pete) currently has over two million likes. Ms Bergman asked the two founders of the page what they think of festive lyrics such as "Even though I'm black as soot, I mean well."  "Well, 'I mean well', that's hitting the nail on
Alex Jones speaks with Steve Pieczenik, (MD, PhD, American psychiatrist, former US Department of State official) about Hillary's current health and the cover-up to hide the fact that she is potentially mentally ill and undergoing a severe health crisis that would inhibit her to run the country if elected.
If you've never had the privilege of eating monkey bread, look no further! The missing link to your happiness is here. Monkey bread is a fun rip-apart bread, dripping in buttery and sugary goodness. This recipe is extremely simple to make, and generously feeds a good amount of people, making this a perfect breakfast dish. Also, you probably have most of these ingredients already in your home pantry, making this a recipe you can create again and again!  Breakfast treat, serves 4-6  Here's What You Need:  2 cans of original home-style pre-packaged biscuits (not the flaky-layers)  1 cup sugar  2 oranges zested  1 teaspoon cinnamon  A pinch of salt  1 cup light brown sugar  1 stick of butter  1 stick of cannabutter  1 tablespoon organic pure vanilla extract  1 bundt cake pan  cake pan Non-stick baking spray  How to Make Marijuana Monkey Bread:  To begin, preheat your oven to 350 degrees Fahrenheit and leave your 2 cans of biscuits in the refrigerator until immediately before you plan on using them – the colder the biscuits, the less likely they will stick together during the sugar-coating process.  First, add the white sugar, orange zest, cinnamon and a pinch of salt to a gallon-size re-sealable plastic bag.  Once your sugar bag is ready, you may remove the two cans of biscuits from the refrigerator and open them. Using a pair of kitchen scissors, cut each biscuit into quarters. After cutting roughly 3-4 biscuits, add the pieces to the plastic bag, seal it, and shake the bag around until all the pieces are covered in the sugar/orange zest blend.  It is recommended that you add batches of 3-4 biscuits to the sugar bag at a time, as this will help prevent the pieces from clumping together into one big ball of dough. Repeat this process until both cans of biscuits are quartered, tossed in the sugar bag, and evenly coated.  Next, generously spray your bundt pan with some non-stick baking spray, making sure to cover every nook and crevice.  Pour the contents of the bag evenly into your bundt pan, rearranging some pieces of biscuit if need be. Set the bundt pan to the side for now.  In a medium skillet, heat up your butter and canna-butter over medium to medium-low heat, until just about fully melted – do not burn the butter. Add in your light brown sugar and vanilla extract and stir until almost thoroughly combined. It's okay if there are some small chunks of brown sugar still in the butter.  Then, carefully pour your butter/sugar mixture over the chunks of biscuit, turning the bundt pan as you pour to ensure even coverage. Shimmy the pan when you're done to make sure all the butter and sugar finds its way to the bottom of the pan.  Pop the bundt pan in the oven for 35-40 minutes, checking often towards the end of the cook time. No spaces in between bits of biscuit chunks should appear doughy, and the top of the monkey bread will have a delicious golden brown color.  Remove the bundt pan from the oven and onto a cooling rack for 10 minutes and WAIT! This is the most difficult part!  You need to allow the buttery, caramel sauce to cool enough so that when you flip over the bundt cake pan, the sauce does not drip all over and create a huge mess.  After 10 minutes have passed, carefully flip and transfer your monkey bread to a large platter. Be careful as the bread will be extremely hot!  Serve and enjoy!
http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/WouldBeRudeToSayGenocide  Adolf Hitler note It was highly disputed by some scholars since it derives from a questionable report of a "secret" speech in 1939, and its veracity was so dubious that the Nuremberg Trial lawyers refused to consider it; however, nowadays it's generally considered genuine. — Attributed to Who now remembers the Armenians?  Some pesky population happened to get in the way and got exterminated as a side effect. For storytelling reasons the operation may not be called genocide or otherwise be made to sound bad. There are three basic ways in which this can play:  Legally speaking, genocide is a category that is fairly recent, dating from the 1920s and entering public consciousness after World War II. The man who coined it, the lawyer Raphael Lemkin, defined it as "a coordinated strategy to destroy a group of people, a process that could be accomplished through total annihilation as well as strategies that eliminate key elements of the group's basic existence, including language, culture, and economic infrastructure." This was eventually enshrined into the 1948 UN Convention of Genocide where it defined genocide as actions, committed with demonstrable intent, to kill off "a national, ethnical, racial or religious group". The key phrase is "co-ordinated" which establishes intent and infrastructure geared to achieving said crime, as well as whether a group of victims can fit categories of identifiable "nation, ethnicity, race or religion".  Since the category was codified, the word is often invoked by many individuals across the political spectrum, to invoke the word to describe any action of mass operations committed by states or organized communities, without regard to whether said example fits the 1948 definition. A large number of historians and scholars when examining allegations of genocide have generally struggled to separate deaths caused by famine, war, disease, expansionism, many of which are consequences of government policies, often incompetently implemented, but lack the evidence of "co-ordination" to display the intent to destroy another people as part of original policy.  The option to be offended is an interesting one.  - How dare you accuse me, my country, or my Lord of genocide?  - But it's true!  - That's not the point. The point is that I get offended when you say such horrible things!  Compare Villain with Good Publicity, Devil in Plain Sight, "Blackmail" Is Such an Ugly Word, Distinction Without a Difference, Deadly Euphemism and Metaphorically True.  Examples:  open/close all folders  Anime & Manga  Comicbooks  In the Lucifer volume Mansions of the Silence, Lucifer annihilates billions of souls as a side effect of saving the life of one single person. (That one person was someone he owed a favor, his billions of victims were not.) Of all the people who witness this tragedy, only Bergelmir says anything about this action being immoral, and even he is quite polite about it. Even so, everyone else simply ignores him as they would a person who's being generally rude, impolite and socially inappropriate. Those present know that annoying Lucifer is really not the best course of action if your plans involve seeing another day, so they're probably staying quiet out of simple self-preservation. But in any case, elsewhere in the comic it is mentioned that it's impossible to destroy a soul - it simply unravels and then rewinds itself over millennia. And considering that the Mansions of Silence are in some ways worse than Hell, it could just as well be said that Lucifer granted their inhabitants a break from their usual torment.  In the Strontium Dog arc "The Final Solution", The New Church publicly claims that they're moving the mutant population in New Britain to new homes in another dimension where they can live in peace away from normal human beings. What they're really doing, however, is rounding up mutants from their ghettos and dumping them in a dimensional wasteland to be stranded and killed by an Eldritch Abomination, but they know that nobody would make much fuss if they make it sound like a peaceful relocation program.  In Runaways, Xavin's attempt to bring an end to the war between their homeworld and Majesdane resulted in both worlds being wiped out. While Xavin's homeworld was just one colony of the larger Skrull Empire, so far as we know, the Majesdanians had only their planet and maybe a colony or two elsewhere, and thus it can assumed that the Majesdanians are nearly extinct (to say nothing of any other lifeforms that lived on their planet...)  Nemesis the Warlock: When Torquemada is on trial for his genocide of billions of aliens as Grand Master of Termight, his defence is to proudly proclaim his crusades necessary because the aliens wanted to destroy them as well, bringing
"Peace on earth, goodwill toward men" is a common Christmas refrain. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)  After more than eight decades on this planet, the primary disappointment of my life is the low rate of progress toward peace on Earth. By "peace on Earth" I mean no group would attempt nor desire to dominate another group based on membership. By "group" I am referring to religions, governments, nations, societies and far too many others to name, that affect our ability to make progress.  Every person I have talked to about this has told me I am wrong to think there could ever be peace on Earth, many quoting scripture to support their conviction. In my opinion, before any real progress could be made, any group that believes if you are not a supporter of our group you should be shunned, chastised or killed in this life or tortured in an afterlife, must disappear from the Earth. If one such group remains, it is unlikely there could be peace on Earth.  Since it is nearly impossible for most adults to change a position once it is ingrained, this effort must begin with what we teach and model to our children. Perhaps a good starting point would be a daily ethics and behavior class.  It would likely take many centuries to change the hearts and minds of the world's population. But if the people who research such things are correct, we have around five billion years before the "sun is done," so it seems a few centuries would be a small investment of time and effort in exchange for the benefits of a peaceful world.  I can imagine creating a world at peace being the greatest challenge humans will ever face, but I believe we are up to the challenge.  — George Ward, Pleasant Hill  Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/2guCsS0
AT GAYBEAST.COM YOU CAN FIND THOUSANDS OF GAY HORSE SEX, GAY DOG SEX AND LOADS OF MALE ANIMAL SEX VIDEOS!  BENEFITS OF SIGNING UP FOR FREE AT GAYBEAST.COM:  FREE MEMBERS CAN WATCH 15 VIDEOS DAILY FROM OUR HUGE MALE AND ANIMALS AREA ALONG WITH 12 FREE BONUS MOVIES FROM THE BONUS AREA.  UPDATED EVERY DAY FOR YOU WITH NEW AND HOT HOME MADE GAY ANIMAL SEX MOVIES!
View splits adjusted to be per 162 games or 650 PAs  First column (I) indicates when a split may be incomplete due to missing play-by-play data. For all seasons after 1973, the play-by-play data is complete ( summary of missing data for pre-1974 ). Runs, stolen bases and caught stealing are calculated from the point of view of the player as the baserunner in a given situation rather than as the batter. For example, for the Runner on 3rd, less than 2 Outs split, Runs Scored indicate how many times the player scored while was a runner on base and there was a runner (not necessarily him) on third and less than two outs. Note: There are hundreds of games prior to 1920 missing RBIs from one or both teams.
Embed This Video On Your Site With This Html: Copy Embed code  <iframe src="http://www.youjizz.com/videos/embed/13117801" frameborder="0" style="width:100%; height:570px;" scrolling="no" allowtransparency="true"></iframe>
Not into talking like a sexy baby, ladies? Good news! Your own natural voice sounds especially seductive all on its own for at least a few days every month, thanks to your menstrual cycle.  A new study published in Evolutionary Behavioral Sciences found that when a woman is at her most fertile—about six days before ovulation—heterosexual men find the sound of her voice particularly attractive.  The author, Sethu Karthikeyan, a researcher from Pace University, enlisted 36 women and 50 heterosexual men for her experiment. The female participants were split into two groups—high fertility and low fertility—and put into a speed-dating scenario, in which they were prompted to listen to a recording of a flirty male voice who asked for her phone number. The women were told to respond by simply reading the phone number shown to them on a screen.  Next, the men were brought in and told to pretend like the female voice they were about to hear was actually giving them her number. They were then asked to rate her level of attractiveness on a scale of one to 100.  Sure enough, the women from the "high fertility" group were rated more attractive than the "low fertility" group, despite the fact the men never saw what these women looked like.  Advertisement  The findings support a growing body of research that suggests a woman's entire sex appeal peaks during this window. What else happens during high fertility?  Women's faces become more attractive: A few years ago, researchers asked 500 men to rate the faces of over 200 women in different menstrual stages. The men rated women who were close to ovulation (i.e., more fertile) more attractive than women who were not.  Women's dance movies become sexier: A study out of Germany asked 48 women to dance to an identical drumbeat, with their hair tied back for consistency. Two-hundred men then rated silhouettes of the dancing women. They judged those in highly fertile stages to be more attractive dancers.  Advertisement  Women make more money: A famous study from 2007 found that strippers made more money while more fertile. The women made $70 per hour during peak fertility, versus roughly $35 while menstruating and $50 in between.  Men in relationships feel threatened: A study from 2011 found that peak fertility's power is so strong that men in committed relationships feel threatened by it. During the study, single men rated highly fertile women as more attractive—but oddly, men in relationships went in the opposite direction and rated those women as significantly less attractive. As the New York Times' John Tierney explained, the men sensed the fertile woman posed a threat to their beloved relationship, and "to avoid being enticed to stray, they apparently told themselves she wasn't all that hot anyway."  Taryn Hillin is Fusion's love and sex writer, with a large focus on the science of relationships. She also loves dogs, Bourbon barrel-aged beers and popcorn — not necessarily in that order.
The late-series mintage of the 1882 three dollar gold was a skimpy 1,500 business strikes accompanied by 76 proof coins. The Bowers reference on the series notes that "circulation strikes have the 2 in the date repunched, with a crescent-shaped vestige of an earlier 2 above the final digit." We would say that the "vestige" is more apostrophe-shaped, with extra business also visible at the midpoint of the final 2--apparently the lower curve of the first 2. The present piece is fairly prooflike in its reflectivity if not its strike, understandably so due to the small emission. The surfaces are pleasing apricot-gold. Population: 33 in 62, 69 finer (3/09). Registry values : N2998) (NGC ID# 25N5 , PCGS# 8004 5.02 grams90% Gold, 10% Copper
J. D. Heyes  Natural News  Feb 18, 2013  These days, political historians are about the only ones who know who Daniel Ellsberg is. That's because his heyday, so to speak, took place more than 40 years ago.  For those who are not familiar with Ellsberg, he became famous during the nation's most tumultuous time in recent memory: The waning days of the Vietnam war, in the early 1970s, when the nation was tearing itself apart socially, culturally and politically.  Ellsberg, you see, was once the country's most famous whistleblower. The information he leaked did more to sour a generation on the federal government than even Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein, the two Washington Post reporters who brought down President Richard Nixon by exposing the Watergate scandal beginning in 1972.  What did Ellsberg do? He leaked the Pentagon Papers, a collection of documents that revealed secret information regarding U.S. involvement in Vietnam decades before American troops were sent to die there. Officially known as "United States-Vietnam Relations: 1945-1967: A Study Prepared by the Department of Defense," the papers served as the first in a series of revelations that disillusioned tens of millions of voters for decades. At the time, Vietnam was being blamed – or scapegoated – for most of what many Americans thought ailed the country, so to find out their government had been involved in the Southeast Asian nation for decades before the war began was devastating.  Now, Ellsberg is once again seeking to hold the government to account for what he believes (and we believe) is a grave miscarriage of justice. In an interview with Democracy Now, an extreme left-wing advocacy group, he says he has become a plaintiff in a federal lawsuit aimed at having a provision of the 2012 National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) allowingpermanent detention of American citizens without ever being charged with a crime struck down.  History of tyrannical legislation  As Natural News founder and Editor-in-chief Mike Adams reported more than a year ago, that provision of the NDAA allows the military to indefinitely detain anyone even remotely suspected of being a terrorist "with no jury, no trial, no legal representation and not even any requirement that the government produce evidence against the accused."  A d v e r t i s e m e n t   A federal judge, Katherine Forrest of the Southern District of New York, has already struck down the indefinite detention provision, ruling that it most likely violates the First and Fifth Amendments. But President Obama ordered his Justice Department to quickly appeal that ruling, saying the 2012 NDAA merely reinstates an existing statute giving the U.S. military the power of infinite detention.  Ellsberg begs to differ.  In the interview, he says that, as an American citizen, he's "whipsawed" by what he is doing but understands it must be done.  "On the one hand, I'm here to attend the court hearing at the circuit court…at the federal court building where I expect to see the Obama administration cover itself with shame in arguing that an American citizen can be detained indefinitely in military custody without charges, indefinitely, violating really, the core principles of law that go back to the [13th century English] Magna Carta," he said.  "On the other hand, I was up late last night reading the 112-page document of Katherine B. Forrest, and I have to say at the end of that…the judgment granting an injunction saying that these provisions of the law that will be argued and defended by – shamefully, by the Obama administration and by three U.S. senators, who will be claiming that the detention is constitutional and legal – her argument was that it was facially unconstitutional."  An impeachable offense  Ellsberg said after he read her detailed ruling and the government's tortured argument attempting to justify said indefinite detention as constitutional, "I felt pride as an American."  "I thought, this is the American citizen that I fought for as a Marine. This is a constitutional order, a rule of law, a judge, appointed by Obama, who's willing to say that her boss was mistaken in claiming that this rule is compatible with our rule of law," he told his interviewers.  The veteran whistleblower said Obama, like Prof. John Yoo of Berkeley, who authored memos during the Bush administration authorizing torture of some terrorist suspects, "has to be seen as either a rotten constitutional lawyer or a man who, like Yoo, believes that the Constitution simply does not bound an American prisoner in any way in an indefinite law of torture."  "And either way, I believe we have here impeachable offenses by all of the people arguing this case, including the three senators – McCain, others – who will be arguing today on this," Ellsberg said. "We should be looking at [John] Brennan [Obama's nominee to head
According to a working paper from the University of Oxford's sociology department, it shouldn't be biochemistry students the Home Office should worry about vetting for national security. It's engineers.  It should be noted that the paper, Engineers of Jihad, by Diego Gambetti and Steffen Herton, doesn't seem to have been peer reviewed. Plus, as The Register points out, it counts Wikipedia and Fox News among its sources.  That aside, Gambetti and Herton argue that even taking into account any over-representation of engineering graduates among men and selection for terrorist activity based on technical skills, there were still a surfeit of those with "an engineer's mindset" among the 404 members of violent Islamist groups in the news they surveyed. Out of the 178 who had gone on to higher education and whose degree subjects were known, 44% were engineers. The second highest subject was Islamic studies.  There are two reasons for the large number of engineers, they argue: a "severe lack" of professional opportunities in Middle Eastern and north African countries, and an apparent tendency for engineers to subscribe to an ultra-conservative, religious worldview - in the US, anyway.  Why engineers? Gambetti and Heron aren't sure:  The sources of the mindset are a puzzle in their own right. It is implausible to think that students of engineering come to their courses tabula rasa and that their mindset is shaped purely by studying this subject. Furthermore, the fact that the same differences are also found among students, who are less socialised into the profession than academics, strongly suggests that to some extent people with a certain forma mentis are driven to study engineering and that this also predisposes them towards conservatism and religiosity.  Could there be any truth in this? Or is this just an attempt to make an issue out of a complete coincidence?
In an interview with Sports Illustrated's Peter King, Jay Cutler revealed that he didn't prepare much for television announcing during the summer before deciding to return to the NFL.  "Did you practice doing TV much this offseason before coming back?" King asked.  "I mean, I'd be lying if I said I did," Cutler responded.  Before making the decision to join former offensive coordinator Adam Gase in Miami, Cutler agreed to join the broadcast team at Fox Sports to call NFL games this season.  However, Cutler is saying he wasn't putting in much effort to get ready for what was supposed to be his new job. On a similar note, Cutler said he hadn't been training much to play quarterback again before getting the call from the Dolphins.  Cutler, 34, is going into his 12th season in the NFL.
LOS ANGELES (AP) — The Southern California Gas Co. has been ordered to permanently close and seal a storage well that's poured natural gas into the air over a Los Angeles neighborhood for months and driven thousands from their homes.  A hearing board of the South Coast Air Quality Management District on Saturday also ordered the utility to fund an independent health study for residents of the Porter Ranch neighborhood and inspect all 115 wells at the Aliso Canyon storage facility to help prevent future leaks.  "As a result of this order, SoCalGas must take immediate steps to minimize air pollution and odors from its leaking well and stop the leak as quickly as possible," said Barry Wallerstein, SCAQMD's executive officer.  However, critics who say people have been sickened by the fumes were furious that the air regulators stopped short of ordering a complete and permanent shutdown of all wells at the huge storage field.  "This is an ongoing disappointment and no one is managing this crisis situation," said a statement from Matt Pakucko, president of the group Save Porter Ranch.  "SQAMD's failure to put Californians' livelihoods first is shameful, and Governor Brown should intervene swiftly," Michael Brune, executive director of the Sierra Club, said in the same press release. "There should be no other choice but to shut down the dangerous Aliso Canyon facility and look to close every urban oil and gas facility throughout California and our country, to ensure the health of our communities and our climate is never again sacrificed for corporate polluter profits."  Southern California Gas Co. did not immediately release any comment on the SQMAMD orders.  The leak, first reported on Oct. 23, has been blamed for ailments including nosebleeds, headaches and nausea in the upscale suburban neighborhood about a mile from the leaking storage well.  The company already has paid to relocate about 3,000 families and may relocate about 3,000 more.  Officials have said that they don't expect long-term health problems associated with the leak, particularly from benzene, a carcinogen of greatest concern.  The Los Angeles County Department of Public Health has said that benzene levels in 15 samples of air in the area were more than double normal levels but none exceeded state standards for acute exposure to benzene.
Adverstisment  Auckland-based architectural firm Fearon Hay Architects has designed the Cliff House, a glass home sited above a cliff overlooking Rangitoto island and the Hauraki Gulf near Auckland, New Zealand.  With glass walls on four sides, this two-story modern home offers jaw dropping panoramic views over the bay while "providing shelter from prevailing weather".  View in gallery  MORE INSPIRATION  Photos by: Patrick Reynolds
Olive oil may get all the press, but safflower oil is emerging as a health superstar in its own right. Made from the seeds of safflowers, which are similar to sunflowers, this oil contains healthy fats and may even help prevent cardiovascular disease. All oils are pure fat, however, which means they're high in calories. Use safflower oil sparingly to help avoid unwanted weight gain.  Healthy Fat  Safflower oil is rich in monounsaturated fat, which may help protect against heart disease. Unlike saturated fats from meat and dairy, which are linked to unhealthy cholesterol levels, monounsaturated fat may help reduce "bad" LDL cholesterol in your bloodstream that can lead to plaque buildup in the arteries, narrowing the passageway. Sometimes, the plaque can break open, causing a blood clot that completely blocks the artery. This may cause a heart attack or stroke, which is why cholesterol management is vital for your cardiovascular health.  Vitamin-E Boost  Safflower oil is also an excellent source of vitamin E, as each tablespoon provides 4.6 milligrams of this nutrient, one-fourth of the daily value. Vitamin E is an antioxidant that helps protect your cells from free-radical damage from sun exposure, cigarette smoke and other pollutants. You also need vitamin E for a healthy immune system and cell signaling, and the nutrient may even play a role in maintaining plaque-free arteries, according to the Office of Dietary Supplements.  Diabetes Help  Safflower oil may be a healthy choice for diabetics to help manage blood sugar, according to a study published in "Clinical Nutrition" in 2011. Researchers gave obese, diabetic women 8 grams -- about 1.6 teaspoons -- of safflower oil each day for 16 weeks, and tested them for blood glucose, signs of inflammation and insulin sensitivity. At the end of the study, they found reduced glucose and inflammatory markers and increased insulin sensitivity, indicating that safflower oil may be helpful in keeping diabetes symptoms under control.  Kitchen Versatility  Not only is safflower oil good for you, but it's versatile enough to fit into just about any recipe that calls for oil. It has a mild flavor, and it works well in baked goods as well as salad dressings or marinades. The refined variety has a high-smoke point -- meaning you can heat it to high temperatures before it burns -- so it's suitable for sauteing or frying. Just look for "high heat" on the label, as some safflower oils don't hold up well in the frying pan.
TodoMVC Kotlin  This project is an implementation of TodoMVC (without the routing parts). Its only purpose is to show you how to get started with Kotlin on the frontend and it is not intended to be an absolute source of truth.  You will need Java to be installed on your computer  clone the project: git clone git@github.com:AppCraft-Projects/todomvc-kotlin.git  cd to the directory: cd todomvc-kotlin/  build the project: ./gradlew clean build  run it: java -jar build/libs/todomvc-kotlin-2017.1.0.jar  navigate to: http://localhost:9090/  That's all!
Choose Steering Left Handle Only Right Handle Only  Any Make --- Popular --- Toyota (24565) Nissan (10951) Honda (8250) Mitsubishi (3307) Mercedes-Benz (3118) BMW (3659) Mazda (3347) Subaru (3376) Volkswagen (1885) Suzuki (7381) Land Rover (1091) Isuzu (1020) Audi (1325) Ford (274) Daihatsu (5782) Lexus (1647) --- Alphabetical --- ABARTH (20) Acura (2) Alfa Romeo (196) Am General (1) AMG (51) Aston Martin (16) Audi (1325) Austin (4) Bentley (51) Birkin (2) BMW (3659) BMW Alpina (22) Cadillac (128) CAT (2) Chevrolet (242) Chrysler (155) Citroen (156) Daewoo (23) Daihatsu (5782) Dodge (124) Europe Ford (1) Ferrari (72) Fiat (256) Ford (274) GM (95) GMC (15) Hino (576) Hitachi (1) Honda (8250) Hummer (108) Hyundai (168) Infiniti (10) Isuzu (1020) Jaguar (160) Jeep (326) Kia Motors (118) Kobelco (2) Komatsu (8) Kubota (7) Lada (1) Lamborghini (45) Lancia (7) Land Rover (1091) Lexus (1647) Lincoln (38) Lotus (9) Maserati (84) Maybach (3) Mazda (3347) MCC (31) Mercedes-Benz (3118) MG (5) Mitsubishi (3307) Mitsubishi Fuso (280) Mitsuoka (46) Nissan (10951) Opel (4) Other All (169) Peugeot (358) Porsche (449) Renault (123) Rolls-Royce (12) Rover (208) Saab (5) Scania (1) Skoda (1) Smart (59) Ssangyong (15) Subaru (3376) Suzuki (7381) TCM (3) Toyota (24565) Triumph (1) U.S.A. Others (2) Volkswagen (1885) Volvo (657) YANMAR (3)  Great Value We offer competitive prices on our 70k plus items range.  Money Back Guarantee tradecarview provides a safer way to send money without worrying about overseas transaction. Read more  Shop with Confidence Our Customer Protection covers your purchase from click to delivery. Read more  24/7 Customer Service Round-the-clock assistance for a smooth shopping experience.
5 security risks your mobile team faces every day  The "anywhere" workplace is one of the biggest trends set to transform the business arena, yet mobility brings greater security threats to corporate data. Despite a changing security landscape, it's vital to thwart risks when your teams go mobile.
Status Update  Progress is blocked by missing features of rust.  Const generics: Specifying the buffer size for both Pool and SmallBuffer is impossible without it. For now a default has been set, but might not fit every use.  Nightly Requirements:  Nightly is required because of the next features:  #![feature(allocator_api)] : Custom alignment for Pool allocations  VeryFast  VeryFast is a collection of useful tools needed mostly by game developers, but fitting anyone who is focused on performance. They are focused on speed and multithreaded safety.  At the moment it supplies one useful class - Pool , which allocates objects on the heap like a Box , but allocates in batches and reuses the memory instead of deallocating when Dropped! It is similar to Arena but allows deallocation.  Tools  Pool  Pool allocates objects on the heap in batches. All objects must be of the same type like in Vec . It allows fast multithreaded parallel allocation of objects. When objects are dropped, their memory is returned to the pool to be reused for future allocations. Only when all the objects and the Pool are dropped will the memory be released.  There are some optimisations for speed: It is possible to allocate each object on a separate CPU cache line (helps with multithreaded access to adjacent elements). The allocations use a lock-free strategy except when allocating a new batch. Deallocations also use a lock-free strategy.  The Pool is similar to various Arena implementations but it allows deallocation of elements and reuse of the memory.  SmallBuffer  A small inline-allocated buffer with expansion capabilities. Pushing values can be done done asynchronously. Reading values needs exclusive access. Removing values is only possible by draining the whole buffer.
You are a Human in Equestria, and it's been a little too long. So when you see a sad looking mare with a cardboard sign offering herself for sale, you take her offer a little more seriously than you ever thought you would.
Representational image. Representational image.  India's only live volcano in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands which had started showing activity in the year 1991 after being dormant for over 150 years has once again started spewing ash, the researchers at Goa based National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) said today. "The only live volcano in the Andaman and Nicobar islands is erupting once again. The Barren Island volcano, located 140-km north-east of Port Blair, dormant for more than 150 years started erupting in 1991 and has since then shown intermittent activity," CSIR-NIO said in a statement here.  Watch What Else Is Making News  A team of scientists led by Abhay Mudholkar, from CSIR-National Institute of Oceanography (CSIR-NIO) in Goa reported that the volcano is active and spewing smoke and lava once again. "On the afternoon of January 23, 2017, the scientific team on board CSIR-NIO's research ship R V Sindhu Sankalp were busy collecting sea floor samples in the Andaman Basin near the Barren volcano when it suddenly started spewing ash," the NIO has said.  "The team moved about one mile from the volcano and began closely observing it. It was erupting in small episodes lasting about five to ten minutes," said the release. During the daytime only ash clouds were observed. However, after sundown, the team observed red lava fountains spewing from the crater into the atmosphere and hot lava flows streaming down the slopes of the volcano, it said.  NIO has said the volcano was revisited in the early hours of January 26, 2017 again during the second leg of the cruise led by B Nagender Nath, it said, adding the team witnessed the continuation of spurts of blasts and smoke. "They have sampled the sediments and water in the vicinity of the volcano and recovered coal-like black pyroclastic material representing proximal volcanic ejecta.  Clouds were seen at the crater mouth where the smoke was bellowing out in otherwise clear sky," the researchers said. These samples will help in deciphering the nature of the present and past volcanic activity in the region. Researchers from CSIR-NIO have been studying the past volcanic events in Andaman Basin-based on the ash layers in a sediment column.  "The team observed the activity for about four hours before continuing with their research cruise. Landing on the volcanic island was not attempted as it was too dangerous," NIO has said. The Andaman Basin is an active back-arc spreading basin and is known for its strong seismicity and many submarine volcanoes and hydrothermal activity, the release said.  Scientists from CSIR-NIO have been surveying the Andaman Basin and they have identified many small submerged volcanoes in a linear chain called a volcanic arc. These volcanoes are formed due to the rising magma formed deep in the mantle due to the melting of the subducted Indian Ocean crust, said the release.  A few of these submarine volcanoes have been dredged for samples and pumice type of light volcanic rock have been recovered, it said. The volcanic island is uninhabited and the northern part of the island is, as the name suggests, barren and devoid of vegetation. Private citizens of India can visit the volcanic island by chartered boats after obtaining permission of the Forest Department in Port Blair.  For all the latest India News, download Indian Express App
Web-based programs like Google's Gmail will force people to buy into locked, proprietary systems that will cost more and more over time, according to the free software campaigner  The concept of using web-based programs like Google's Gmail is "worse than stupidity", according to a leading advocate of free software.  Cloud computing – where IT power is delivered over the internet as you need it, rather than drawn from a desktop computer – has gained currency in recent years. Large internet and technology companies including Google, Microsoft and Amazon are pushing forward their plans to deliver information and software over the net.  But Richard Stallman, founder of the Free Software Foundation and creator of the computer operating system GNU, said that cloud computing was simply a trap aimed at forcing more people to buy into locked, proprietary systems that would cost them more and more over time.  "It's stupidity. It's worse than stupidity: it's a marketing hype campaign," he told The Guardian.  "Somebody is saying this is inevitable – and whenever you hear somebody saying that, it's very likely to be a set of businesses campaigning to make it true."  The 55-year-old New Yorker said that computer users should be keen to keep their information in their own hands, rather than hand it over to a third party.  His comments echo those made last week by Larry Ellison, the founder of Oracle, who criticised the rash of cloud computing announcements as "fashion-driven" and "complete gibberish".  "The interesting thing about cloud computing is that we've redefined cloud computing to include everything that we already do," he said. "The computer industry is the only industry that is more fashion-driven than women's fashion. Maybe I'm an idiot, but I have no idea what anyone is talking about. What is it? It's complete gibberish. It's insane. When is this idiocy going to stop?"  The growing number of people storing information on internet-accessible servers rather than on their own machines, has become a core part of the rise of Web 2.0 applications. Millions of people now upload personal data such as emails, photographs and, increasingly, their work, to sites owned by companies such as Google.  Computer manufacturer Dell recently even tried to trademark the term "cloud computing", although its application was refused.  But there has been growing concern that mainstream adoption of cloud computing could present a mixture of privacy and ownership issues, with users potentially being locked out of their own files.  Stallman, who is a staunch privacy advocate, advised users to stay local and stick with their own computers.  "One reason you should not use web applications to do your computing is that you lose control," he said. "It's just as bad as using a proprietary program. Do your own computing on your own computer with your copy of a freedom-respecting program. If you use a proprietary program or somebody else's web server, you're defenceless. You're putty in the hands of whoever developed that software."
Therapeutic Riding Survey  Thank you for participating in our survey. Our communication research class is conducting research on Therapeutic Riding. Please complete the following survey on Therapeutic Riding and check the answer that best applies to you.  * Required
CNN calls for the banning of the term "fake news", claiming that it has been "weaponized by politicians".  Following the leftist traditions CNN is now calling for the banning of words. While the failing news network was among the main proponents of the term "fake news" in late 2016, things have not fared well for them since, with a lot of "fake news" published by CNN having backfired on them in a grand fashion. So what would leftists do in such a situation? Ban everything, obviously.  Much like crying Social Justice Warriors, the former news giant not only fails to take responsibility for their actions, but also blames others for their own shortcomings.  Increasingly the term has become weaponized by politicians who use it to undermine independent journalism in an effort to reach the public directly through their own channels.  In a hilarious attempt to save face, the authors of the piece mentioned the use of the term "fake news" as an attack on "independent journalism". What they failed to specify however, is how a mainstream corporatized media channel is related to independent journalism.  Recent revelations about foreign meddling in the US elections have exposed the fact that we're targets in an active information war. Previously these types of campaigns were fought via sophisticated and expensive communication technologies, such as short-wave radio or transnational satellite television.  Now significantly less powerful agents can harm large institutions or established individuals with few resources. It is asymmetrical warfare.  It truly must hurt, when individual people – oftentimes with limited resources – can join the ranks of the alternative media and provide real news in the field. It is the alternative media which has exposed the lies, the hypocrisy and outright bias of the mainstream media. That is not to say that all of alternative news channels are to be fully trusted nor that they are completely without bias themselves, but I gather you get the point. Instead of taking any criticism, CNN has resorted to the use of fancy words, such as "asymmetrical warfare", and I admit, many of its loyal followers (mostly 60+ people – sorry, old people reading this) might even agree with their assessment. After all, they use fancy words, so they must have some substance behind them, right?  Claire Wardle, the co-author of the Op-Ed also appeared on CNN's "Reliable Sources" on Sunday to discuss "fake news", saying; "It's been labelled for things they don't like, and it's being used against as a weapon against organizations like CNN. It's damaging to the industry, the free press is what we stand for." While naming a show "Reliable Sources" might indeed sound reliable for some of their more ignorant audience, it does raise questions about all their other shows. If one show is called "Reliable Sources", then what about everything else? Is it not one the foundations of a free and independent media to be "reliable"? But then again, we are speaking of CNN here. Not news, not independent, not reliable. Big brother would be proud, however.  Sources:  http://edition.cnn.com/2017/11/26/opinions/fake-news-and-disinformation-opinion-wardle-derakhshan/index.html  http://edition.cnn.com/shows/reliable-sources  Author: Sander Laanemaa Sander Laanemaa was born in Estonia in 1984. In 2011 he graduated from the Estonian Maritime Academy as a deck officer. During his studies he took an interest in history, philosophy, psychology, and the occult. His research guided him deep into the rabbit hole, which ultimately led to the creation of Culture Wars. Sander is fluent in English, Swedish, Finnish, and Estonian. He has given a number of lectures on various topics on maritime affairs, and also on ancient history and the faults of contemporary social movements.
Introduction  You are about to read one of the most incredible novels in your life! We are about to take you upon a journey into the unexplored world of raw, human sexuality, a world which contains astounding and graphic acts of lust and depravity! These topics are traditionally considered "taboo" in polite society, but the publishers, realizing our reader's demands for the finest in adult fiction, have spared no pains to bring you a fast-paced and gripping novel.  What of a wife's hidden desires; desires to be with other men; desires which she must keep secret from her husband? And, what if the right circumstances arose which would trigger these desires and bring them to the surface?  Within the following pages, you will meet Jane Simpson, the sumptuous teenage wife of Jack Simpson. You will follow Jane upon a bizarre turn of events where she becomes the victim of an unscrupulous doctor who will stop at nothing to possess the body of a woman he desires! More importantly, you will follow Jane as she learns things about her voluptuous body which she never knew existed!  You will be in the same room with Jane on one evening when she becomes the captive of a group of men who will stop at nothing to get what they want from her!  -THE PUBLISHERS
Observers highlight warmth, wisdom in Xi's unique diplomatic strategy  Global observers have been speaking highly of the warmth and wisdom embedded in the "unique diplomatic strategy and style" crafted by Chinese President Xi Jinping. These remarks have been made in reaction to "Major-Country Diplomacy," a six-episode political documentary rolled out by China on its diplomatic principles, practices and achievements over the past five years. The TV series on China's major-country diplomacy sums up quite effectively some of the most important events of the last five years in which China has played a decisive role. Referring to the Chinese President Xi Jinping, William Jones, the Washington Bureau chief for Executive Intelligence Review news magazine said that, It gives the picture of a man who is genuinely a 'people person' and shows the sincere warmth of his personality. The series breathes a spirit of hope and optimism into a world still plagued by poverty, wars and devastations, noting that Xi's call for a new paradigm in international relations based on a win-win formula represents a clear break with the old political formulas characterized by zero-sum geopolitics. Khairy Tourk, a professor at Stuart School of Business of Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT), said the developing countries have been trapped in the post-1945 global order, where they are always at a disadvantage. Xi's policies are changing all of that. Among others, the observer said many weak nations have been trapped in the old order because they are raw material-producing countries and lack the means to achieve modernization; meanwhile, China is ready to share its advanced technology, like high-speed railway technology, with these countries.   "The Belt and Road Initiative, without any doubt, is providing the world with a new economic engine. This is the major engine for growth in the 21st century. Keith Bennett, vice chairman of Britain's 48 Group Club said that China's major-country diplomacy "treats all countries, big or small, as equals" and "promotes friendship among peoples as the bedrock and guarantor of friendship and cooperation among states. Xi has crafted a unique diplomatic strategy and style for his country, which serves to not only promote the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation, but also to move forward towards the creation of a shared future for mankind. "As such, his energetic, tireless and visionary diplomatic activity is admired, appreciated and closely followed not only by the Chinese people, but increasingly by people all over the world as well. Taking notice of the wisdom in China's diplomacy, observers highlighted the Belt and Road Initiative proposed by Xi on Sept. 7, 2013 in a speech at Kazakhstan's Nazarbayev University. The initiative comprises the Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road, which aims to build trade and infrastructure, networks connecting Asia with Europe and Africa on and beyond the ancient Silk Road routes. Nourhan el-Sheikh, a professor of political science at Cairo University said that China launched the Belt and Road Initiative very seriously and with massive plans that would reach a larger part of the world. David Gosset, a founder of the Europe-China Forum said that The Belt and Road Initiative is an expression of China's opening up 2.0, it is a structured global projection aiming at finding mutually beneficial political and economic synergies. According to the observers, with the policy, the economic outlook would be brighter. The wisdom of China's diplomacy is also reflected in the reality that China has been seeking to build bridges with the West, and that it does not pose a threat to any other country in the course of its development. China needs technology from the West, while the West needs the Chinese market, and China is creating an interconnected world. By doing this, China can get respect from other countries and will obtain win-win results together with the other countries. For observers; another reason leading to the success of Chinese diplomacy is patience. "Eating bitterness," "thinking carefully before taking action," and always "thinking in the long-term" are unique Chinese values reflected also in its diplomatic policies. For example, one of the reasons that the West has kept infrastructure development from expanding to developing countries is that people in the West want quick returns on investment. China, however, provides countries with long-term loans in the construction of the Belt and Road, noting that "patience is something to ensure the success of the grand vision of the Belt and Road."   Comments  comments
In 1965, a year before hooking up with the musicians who would form The Buffalo Springfield, Neil Young had a brief stint in a Canadian rock group called The Mynah Birds fronted by Rick James (yes, THAT Rick James). At this point in James' career he was known as Ricky James Matthew and did a stellar imitation of Mick Jagger. The group had a raw exciting sound that hinted at The Stones, Them, and various American garage bands. The Mynah Birds nailed a deal with Motown Records (the first white band to do so) and recorded sixteen tracks in Detroit. But things turned bad.  In his authorized Neil Young biography, Shakey, Jimmy McDonough describes the scene:  The Mynah Birds—in black leather jackets, yellow turtlenecks and boots—had quite a surreal scene going. The band was financed by John Craig Eaton of the Eaton's department-store dynasty. Legend has it he poured money into the band, establishing a bottomless account for the band's equipment needs. Those lucky enough to see any of the band's few gigs say they were electrifying. 'Neil would stop playing lead, do a harp solo, throw the harmonica way up in the air and Ricky would catch it and continue the solo.' Unfortunately, everything screeched to a halt when James was busted in the studio for being AWOL from the navy. "We thought he was Canadian," said Palmer. "Even though there are no Negroes in Canada." A single, "It's My Time," was allegedly pulled the day of release, and the album recordings were shelved and remain unreleased to this day."  Here's a couple of hard-rocking tracks from the legendary Motown Mynah Birds' sessions. The musicians are Young and future Buffalo Springfield member Bruce Palmer and Goldy McJohn and Nick St. Nicholas who would later establish Steppenwolf with John Kay.  "It's My Time" was co-written by Young and James:   "I'll Wait Forever":   "I've Got You In My Soul ":   "Go On And Cry":
Quote is an action role-playing game about cleansing the world of knowledge.  Play as Novella, priestess of the God of Ignorance, Bliss, and her mysterious, gluttonous avian sidekick Tatters.  Brawl and sneak your way across a beautiful but ravaged world to sniff out the source of the corrupting wisdom.  Quote is inspired by traditional isometric adventure games, the works of revered authors such as Vonnegut, Bradbury, Eco, Huxley and the surreal art of Hieronymus Bosch.
Engraving weak interfaces within the glass bulk  Lasers have been widely used in the past to alter the structure of materials and to generate useful structures at small scale and with high accuracy: surface roughness, microfluidic devices or waveguides36,37,38,39,40. Here we used a 3D laser engraving technique, which consists of focusing a laser beam at predefined points by using a set of two mirrors and a focusing lens (Fig. 2a). The UV laser beam (355 nm) used here travels in glass with little absorbance, and can be focused anywhere within the bulk of the material. When the system is properly tuned, the energy of the unfocused laser beam does not induce any structural changes in glass. However, the heat absorbed at the focal point is sufficient to generate radial microcracks from the hoop stresses associated with thermal expansion (Fig. 2b)41,42,43. These cracks only propagate over short distances, because the hoop stresses decrease rapidly away from the focal point. With a pulsed laser system, 3D complex arrays of thousands of defects can be engraved in a short period of time and with sub-micrometre precision (Fig. 2c). The size of the defects can also be tuned by adjusting the power of the laser. For our combination of glass material and laser (see Methods section) we found that a minimum average power of 35 mW is required to generate defects (Fig. 2d). Increasing the laser power generated larger cracks following a linear relationship, up to a plateau starting at a power of 140 mW. Powers beyond this threshold generated defects of constant size (about 25 microns). This response provided a window sufficiently large to tune the size of the microcracks. Arrays of such defects were then generated within the bulk of glass, effectively creating weaker interfaces following the concept of 'stamp holes': Once the weaker interfaces are engraved, the application of an external load may grow the microcracks until they coalesce, effectively channelling the propagation of long cracks. Furthermore, the toughness of the interface can be tuned by adjusting the size or spacing of the defects. To demonstrate these concepts we prepared compact tension fracture samples containing a pre-notch and an array of equi-spaced defects along the anticipated path of crack propagation (Fig. 2e). We used this geometry to measure the apparent toughness of the interface as function of defect size and spacing. Figure 2f shows the effect of defect spacing on the toughness of the interface, for an average defect size of 25 μm. When these defects were very close to each other (spaced by 80 μm or closer), they coalesced on engraving without applying any external load, effectively cutting the sample in half (apparent toughness was zero). Increasing the spacing between the defects increased the toughness of the interface, up to a spacing of 130 μm. Defects more than 130 μm apart did not interact on application of an external load, and in these cases the apparent toughness was close to the toughness of intact glass (that is, no interface was created). These simple experiments show that 3D laser engraving can provide a fast and simple approach in generating weak interfaces of tunable toughness within glass.  Figure 2: Interfaces with tunable toughness by 3D laser engraving. (a) 3D laser engraving set-up. A laser beam is aimed and focused with high accuracy in the bulk of a block of glass. (b) The absorption of the energy provided by the laser raises the temperature locally, which generates hoop stresses and microcracks around the focal point. (c) Optical image of a line of micro-defects engraved within glass (scale bar: 50 μm). a denotes half the crack length. (d) The size of the micro-defects can be controlled by adjusting the power of the laser (the error bar corresponds to standard deviation, N=10 for each laser power). (e) Glass compact tension fracture specimen used to measure the fracture toughness of the engraved interface consisting of an array of micro-defects (spacing s). (f) Effect of defect spacing on the fracture toughness of the interface (normalized by the fracture toughness of intact glass). and are the critical stress intensity factors of the interface and the bulk of the material, respectively. The error bars correspond to standard deviation (N=5 for each defect spacing). Full size image  Guiding cracks along engraved interfaces  Our next step was to exploit these weak interfaces in order to deflect and channel cracks along predefined paths. Theoretical fracture mechanics predicts that an incident crack propagating in mode I (opening) intersecting a weak interface at an angle θ may either deflect along the interface or proceed into the bulk of the material (Fig. 3a). The condition for the crack to propagate and deflect into the weak interface may be written in energy terms44:  Figure 3: Crack deflection into weak interfaces
It's been a summer of change for the Vancouver Canucks with the high profile acquisitions of defenceman Erik Gudbranson and winger Loui Eriksson. Both of those overshadowed an addition that was completed before last season ended: the re-signing of Swedish winger Anton Rodin.  Rodin is a former 2009 second round pick of the Canucks who has played in the AHL and the Swedish Hockey League throughout his young career so far.  After being selected in the NHL Entry Draft, Rodin returned to Sweden to further develop his game with hopes of eventually making the leap to North America. Most Canucks fans got their first look at Rodin when he represented Sweden at 2010 World Juniors in Saskatchewan, and it was a very good first showing.  Helping lead Sweden to a bronze medal with 10 points in 6 games, Rodin showed flashes of what his potential could be - a playmaker who uses his combination of high end skating abilities, hockey vision and passing abilities to make everyone on his line better.  Rodin returned to Sweden for the 2010-11 season, posting 7 goals and 19 assists in 53 games in the Swedish Hockey League, which is extremely impressive numbers for a 21-year-old. He appeared ready to make the transition to the AHL and move forward with his career.  However, battling a shoulder injury, the Gavle, Sweden native had some struggles his first time in North America. At the conclusion of the 2012-13 season, after only posting 14 points in 49 games during an injury filled 49 game season with then AHL affiliate Chicago Wolves, Rodin returned to Sweden to play for his hometown Brynas IF.  The Canucks had submitted a qualifying offer prior to his departure to retain his NHL rights, which was a savvy idea at the time because although Rodin had some trouble adjusting to the AHL, the skill he possessed was still clearly displayed. That small move now looks even better because after three years in the SHL, Rodin appears ready to make the leap to the NHL.  Those injury concerns from earlier in his career are a thing of the past, as Rodin has recently shown a propensity to battle in front of the net and get those dirty goals. Throughout this past season, he has taken a big hit, got back up and jumped back into the battle. Scoring big goals right in front of net or battling in the corners and coming out with the puck. Promising signs for a skilled player looking to round out his game.  All of this while being one of the best players in the Swedish Hockey League. Rodin was leading the league in scoring before suffering a freak injury in practice where a teammates skate cut him just below the knee, that resulted in him missing the remainder of the regular season and playoffs.  Despite missing 19 games last year, Rodin concluded the SHL season tied for 15th in points and finished the season in first place in points per game at 1.12 PPG and 6th in assists per game with 0.636 A/PG. That production did not go unnoticed as Rodin won the SHL Golden Helmet, which is awarded to the most valuable player in a player vote, similar to the Ted Lindsay Award in the NHL. His production was comparable to totals that were posted by Colorado Avalanche centre Carl Soderberg and New York Rangers winger Mats Zuccarello before they made the leap to North America. So there is a track record of players who saw high levels of success in the SHL translating to the NHL.  All of those offensive accolades are impressive and are the noticeable parts of Rodin's game, but he has also rounded his game out to be effective in all three zones. He uses his skating abilities and reads to help in the defensive zone and then transition the puck out of the zone.  That is an important development for any player, because sometimes the puck just won't bounce the right way or a player can't seem to buy a goal. So having the ability to make a tangible impact in your own zone goes a long way towards making a tangible impact to every game.  The injury that Rodin suffered in January has limited Rodin's ability to skate this summer, but it is expected that he will be ready to go for training camp next month.  With that being said, it's hard to predict what will happen with Rodin, however if his past season is any indication of what can happen, then there is reason to be excited. The underlying skill is there to make an impact in offensive zone, and Rodin has shown over the past three seasons in Sweden to be an effective defensive player when required. All that's left is for Rodin to make his NHL debut this fall and try to bring some of that success to Vancouver.
Mauricio Pochettino will assess the fitness of four players ahead of our Premier League opener at Manchester United tomorrow (Saturday, August 8, 12.45pm).  Hugo Lloris (wrist) and Ryan Mason (knee) both returned to action against AC Milan in the Audi Cup on Wednesday after recovering from injury. Both entered the fray after 54 minutes at the Allianz Arena.  Meanwhile, Roberto Soldado (back) and Andros Townsend (shoulder) have missed our pre-season friendlies against the MLS All Stars, Real Madrid and Milan.  Mauricio reported on Friday: "We have a good feeling for Hugo and Ryan, maybe not to compete for 90 minutes, but to be in the squad.  "Soldado didn't play in the Audi Cup because of a problem in his lower back, Andros also has a problem in his shoulder. We need to assess them in the last training session today."  Mauricio also reported that Alex Pritchard will soon start to train with the squad after being ruled out of pre-season with an ankle injury sustained in the UEFA Under-21 Championship. "It was a shame because we expect a lot from him," added Mauricio.
Boston Dynamics, famous for its videos of pushing robots over and watching them struggle to get up, has been busy. At the TechCrunch Disrupt conference in London on Monday, founder Marc Raibert shared the company's progress, gave hints about when we can expect the quadruped robots to reach the market, and gave a demonstration of dog-like household companion SpotMini.  The company debuted SpotMini back in June. The tiny bot weighs just 55 pounds, but it's been designed for traversing the most treacherous of household layouts to complete tasks like clearing up crockery, loading the dishwasher and fetching a beer with the help of its robot hand.  In many ways, SpotMini is the Roomba taken to a whole new level. iRobot's self-driving vacuum cleaner has taken the world by storm, with CEO Colin Angle claiming that one fifth of the world's vacuum cleaners are Roombas. But where the Roomba keeps the floors tidy, Boston Dynamics answers the age-old question that has plagued fraternity houses for decades: whose plate is this, and who's going to clean it up?  Boston Dynamics' SpotMini does a little dance #TCDisrupt pic.twitter.com/rB9WlSqdou — Mike Brown (@mikearildbrown) December 5, 2016  Unfortunately, the technology still needs a bit of refinement. SpotMini seems to struggle under stage lights, so any playwrights looking to use one in their next work may want to avoid for now:  Boston Dynamics' Spot Mini takes the stage #TCDisrupt pic.twitter.com/BAcRIPAzqw — Mike Brown (@mikearildbrown) December 5, 2016  It's impressive tech, but right now there's little in the way of a roadmap or release date for consumers. It's something Boston Dynamics is starting to consider though, and Raibert hinted that a public launch could occur at some point in the future.  "SpotMini has a diversity of capability," Raibert said on Monday. "Its mobility is very good, its manipulation skills are coming along, the vision is pretty good. So we're starting to turn the corner to think about how to make it a product."  Original SoFi: The Robotic Fish  Hopefully that materializes into a product that consumers can buy, but until then, it seems you'll have to clear up the kitchen the old-fashioned way.
MEGAPLEX!~ ah i just let this here to let everyone know that im gonna be at megaplex tomorrow, so if anyone manages to see me in there just say hi!, i wont bite or anything~ Posted:   Comments: Comments (2)   [Read more...]  Profile ID  Artist Information Species : Lizard/ original species  Age : 27  Music type/genre : Prog rock, NWOBHM, Synthpop, technopop  Favorite game : Most JRPG's, Final Fantasy 6, Klonoa, PMD  Favorite game platform : PSX   Contact Information  Shouts  ZerokTheDragon Posted: Your art is amazing!  <3  HaruFeng Posted: ♥  LittleFluffyEars Posted: I've been following your twitter for awhile now and wondered where I saw you. It just clicked the other night .-.   you're gallery is adorable <3  ringtailmaster Posted: Your style is amazing n_n  Carrot Posted: YOOOOOOOOOOOO your paintings are rad! I wanna watch you paint :>  KaiTheShadowFox Posted: Omg your artwork! How did I not know it existed til now?!  dr4g0nl0v3r Posted: really love your art and your style, lots of fun stuff to see in your gallery! ^.=.^  FOX-POP Posted: your style is adorable! I can't avoid watching ya! :D  Sinx-Pancake Posted: I really love your work  Mysticeevee49 Posted: Your work is really beautiful  Vendaris Posted: Really great work my friend!~  Henkou Posted:   vvvv Exactly what Dessy saidvvvv
Community mental health centers, also referred to as Local Mental Health Authorities (LMHAs) provide services to a specific geographic area of the state, called the local service area. DSHS requires each authority to plan, develop policy, coordinate and allocate and develop resources for mental health services in the local service area. DSHS contracts with 39 Community Mental Health Centers and NorthSTAR to deliver mental health services in communities across Texas.  Each LMHA is also required to consider public input, the ultimate cost-benefit, and client care issues to:  Ensure consumer choice and the best use of public money in assembling a network of service providers and determining whether to become a provider of service or to contract that service to another organization, and  In making recommendations relating to the most appropriate and available treatment alternatives for individuals in need of mental health or mental retardation services.  To find mental health services in your area, please refer to the listing at http://www.dshs.state.tx.us/mhsa/lmha-list/ or search for the referral line phone number of your Local Mental Health Authority (LMHA) using the online mental health services search form. You may call the referral line of the LMHA in your area for confidential help 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
The word "trees" is a plural noun. The plural form of the word "child" is "children." a plural verb such as "are" or "were" rather than a singular verb such as "is" or "was"  Recent Examples on the Web  Make that apps, plural, including the following new ones that offer non-hotel guests access to hotel services. Elaine Glusac, New York Times, "3 New Services That Bring Hotel Amenities to Travelers Not in Hotels," 25 June 2018  The views of the prophet and his wife bent toward benevolence and rendered Jane infantilized, resulting in the offer of adoption and positioning her as their child in the eternities, as opposed to a plural wife, like so many white women. Mica Mcgriggs, Teen Vogue, "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Celebrated the 40-Year Anniversary of the Lifted Ban Against Black Members," 11 July 2018  That's what drives most of my writing – the plural heritage of India. Randy Dotinga, The Christian Science Monitor, "Ruby Lal, author of 'Empress,' discusses the amazing life and reign of Nur Jahan," 27 June 2018  But all of that said, this is a Heat team that needs closers (plural), essentially ending last season solely with Wade in that role. Ira Winderman, Sun-Sentinel.com, "ASK IRA: Would Carmelo Anthony make sense for the Heat on any level?," 7 July 2018  The new Germans are more plural, more confrontational, more divided But perhaps Germany has been spoilt. The Economist, "Children of MerkelWhere does Germany go from here?," 12 Apr. 2018  And as Priest's girlfriends — yes, plural — Lex Scott Davis and Andrea Londo seem to exist in a character vacuum. Kristen Page-kirby, kansascity, "'SuperFly' makes a decent but unnecessary return," 14 June 2018  One of the Contesse (plural for Contessa), the present-day descendants of the Corsini family, will lead you in a private visit of this late baroque masterpiece, one of the most unique treasures of the city. Maria Gabriella Landers, Town & Country, "How to Plan a Trip to Italy," 5 Oct. 2016  These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'plural.' Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback.
Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption North Korea used its military parade to send a clear message about its nuclear programme, reports John Sudworth  North Korea has warned the US not to take provocative action in the region, saying it is "ready to hit back with nuclear attacks".  The comments came as North Korea marked the 105th anniversary of the birth of its founding president, Kim Il-sung.  A huge parade in Pyongyang was held amid speculation current leader Kim Jong-un could order a new nuclear test.  Among the hardware on display appeared to be new intercontinental and submarine-launched ballistic missiles.  The show of strength comes amid mounting tension, with a US aircraft carrier group steaming towards the region.  "We're prepared to respond to an all-out war with an all-out war," said Choe Ryong-hae, believed to be the country's second most powerful official.  Image copyright Reuters Image caption Kim Jong-un appeared relaxed and laughed with aides  "We are ready to hit back with nuclear attacks of our own style against any nuclear attacks," he said.  Rows of military bands and goose-stepping and sword-wielding soldiers marched through Pyongyang's main Kim Il-sung square for the "Day of the Sun" celebrations, as a black-suited Kim Jong-un watched on.  He saluted an honour guard and took his place on the podium. At times he appeared relaxed and laughed with aides.  Awe and dread: BBC's John Sudworth in Pyongyang  Image copyright Reuters  It was an extraordinary and perturbing spectacle. In fact, more than a spectacle. As the thousands upon thousands of soldiers goose-stepped past, in a highly choreographed display of loyalty and unity, you could literally feel the ground shake beneath your feet.  And they kept coming, in perfect formation, on and on, until eventually looming into view behind them, came the heavy weaponry. It included the components of the regime's fledgling nuclear weapons programme - the giant missiles on mobile launchers, their engines growling and competing with the sound of the music and the marching feet.  And then, finally, the residents of Pyongyang began flowing past, dressed in vibrant traditional dress and cheering and weeping as they went. As with the military, as they walked along all had their faces turned towards their watching young leader, Kim Jong-un. It was a two-hour-long master class in totalitarian mobilisation meant to instil awe and dread. I can confirm, conclusively, that it does.  Military planes created the number 105 in the sky.  With concerns that North Korea is getting closer to successfully producing a nuclear arsenal, Saturday's parade was an opportunity for Mr Kim to broadcast North Korea's current military capabilities.  On display for the first time were what appeared to be the Pukkuksong submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs), which have a range of more than 1,000 km (600 miles).  Weapons analysts said there also appeared to be two new types of intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBM) in canister launchers, but it remains unclear whether they have been tested and Pyongyang has yet to announce it has an operational ICBM.  Image copyright Reuters Image caption North Korea is marking the 105th anniversary of the birth of Kim Il-sung  The nation's aim is to be able to put a nuclear warhead on an ICBM that can reach targets around the world.  It has conducted five nuclear tests and a series of missile launches in pursuit of that goal.  Pyongyang has claimed to have miniaturised nuclear warheads for use on missiles, though experts have cast doubt on that given the lack of evidence.  Saturday's military parade made clear how vital the state's nuclear programme is to its future ambitions, as it continues to ignore growing pressure from the US to abandon its nuclear weapons programme.  On Friday, China's Foreign Minister Wang Yi warned that "conflict could break out at any moment", adding that if war occurred there could be no winner.  Unlike at previous Pyongyang parades there did not appear to be any Chinese representatives present.  Image copyright Getty Images Image caption The US carrier group deploying off the Korean peninsula is led by the USS Carl Vinson  Adding to Chinese unease, US President Donald Trump said on Thursday that "the problem of North Korea" would be "taken care of".  "If China decides to help, that would be great. If not, we will solve the problem without them! U.S.A."  Vice-President Mike Pence will be in South Korea on Sunday as part of a 10-day Asia trip.  The aircraft carrier USS Carl Vinson and an accompanying battle group have also been sent to the Korean peninsula.  "We are sending an armada. Very powerful," Mr Trump told the Fox Business Network
ADVERTISING:  Maelk tweets about his new team Maelk tweets about his new team  Well it all started when I watched myself in Free to Play a couple of weeks ago, something sparked inside me and I missed the competition. Cap and I were furious after losing the staff cup, we knew that if we found different team-mates, we could have a great shot at TI4. I'm not going down in DOTA history as that guy who managed to die 20 times and still win the game, that's not what I want on my gravestone. It was a mistake to retire in my prime, and I believe Team Boreas will be just as successful as MYM was in DOTA 1. We're excited to play in Nexon Sponosrship League 4, challenging ourselves against the top multi-national teams and of course, the one full Korean team.  Jacob "Maelk" Toft-Andersen  A lot of people just think of me as some badass who used to be in the Marines, but I used to play a lot of competitive Dota as well. And now with the rise of Sniper coming back into the meta, my expert marksmanship skills can finally shine on a professional team along side a professional support feeder and bloodseeker player- Maelk. Being a Marine (once a Marine, always a Marine) hardcore training comes naturally to me, so I'm looking forward to some intense scrims with Team Zephyr. Hopefully those guys (especially Purge, dude's got a wicked field stache goin on) left us some Koreans to exterminate. I love nothin more than locating, closing with, and destroying the enemy by fire and maneuver.  Austin "TheCapitalist" Walsh  Flame and Burn: I'm getting kicked  B L O G B O Y S: Where is my salary I'm done waiting.  Maelk  TheCapitalist  FLUFFNSTUFF  Veldt  DeMon  Team Boreas, meaning the north wind, will be a multi-national team that sees FLUFF return to his role as captain. The former Team Liquid player who caused a stir with his heart-felt story of personal struggle in his award-winning blog helped lead his team that "has been a joke for as long as I can remember" to victory against Cloud9. Maelk is hoping the brilliant young mind can do the same for Team Boreas. The duo will be joined by MMR master Veldt, who recently broke the record for MMR when he reached 6.9K, as well as Jimmy "Demon" Ho and commentator Austin "TheCapitalist" Walsh. Demon will be standing-in as the team's fifth player until three weeks into the team's formation when he will leave to make way for a new player.What is more, in cooperation with joinDOTA FLuff has agreed to blog about the team's life in Korea live from our forums. Working titles for the blog includeandHis announcement has already reached rank #1 on Reddit , with users extremely keen to hearing from the emotional young American. Team Boreas will be competing in the ESL One open qualifiers announced yesterday and Maelk has released official pictures of the team's luxurious headquarters in the heart of Seoul.Team Boreas rosterJacob "" Toft-AndersenAustin "" WalshBrian "" LeeJoe "" KingJimmy "" Ho
Islands, the popular Hawaiian-themed restaurant chain is giving away free Mavericks burgers and fries today at all Los Angeles locations until close -- a tribute to the Mavericks International Surf Contest. The surfing competition didn't actually take place this year, but the restaurant still wanted to celebrate by giving customers free Mavericks burgers and fries.  The Islands Mavericks burger comes topped with BBQ sauce, Islands' signature crispy onion strings (Islands Reds), American cheese, lettuce, tomato and pickles, served with a side of fries. To receive the free burger, guests need to bring in a picture of any Maverick wave (big wave). You can find one on the Island's Facebook page. The limit is one burger per person.  ALSO:  Test Kitchen tips: Egg topper  Test Kitchen tips: Egg slicer  L.A. has a winner among Food & Wine's Best New Chefs  -- Jenn Harris  twitter.com/jenn_harris  Photo: The Islands Maverick burger. Credit: Islands.
Stacks and Wits is a single player turn based strategy game. Your strength is in your number of dice. War between players determines the winner. Do you risk dice you have to get more or will your strategy fail you? Devise your strategy, take your turn. Let the roll of the dice determine your fate.   The goal is to control the entire map, by attacking opponents territory. Any territory that the player, the yellow ones, owns that has a stack of two or more on it can attack an opponents territory that it touches. The opponents will attempt to do the same to you and each other. The size of the stack determines the chance of a win on each move, that number of dice is rolled against the opponents. The greater the sum is the winner. Once you have made your moves, if any, the turn is ended by pressing end turn. Upon a turn ending the stacks on your territories are increased by the maximum number of connected territories. If you lose all your territory you lose the game. If you control all of them, you win.
What is All Search (Allsearch.com, BrowserSeek)?  All Search (Allsearch, Allsearch.com, BrowserSeek, Browser Seek Toolbar) is a virus (defined as a redirection virus), categorized as a relatively unknown and very dangerous browser hijacker. Many victims notice their computers and internet browsers have become infected by All Search when internet browser settings have changed, such as home page (startup page), search tools (BrowserSeek: adware/rootkit), extensions, and webpage redirections. Website redirections activated by the All Search virus cause search terms and URLs inputted into the internet browsers address bar to redirect to malicious websites or Allsearch.com, which is a malicious website in itself. Access to Allsearch.com without being infected is almost impossible; You are only allowed to view a blank webpage with a possible loading bar (pictured).   "Browser Seek" standalone is also known as Gen.Variant.AdWare.Zwangi [Ikarus] and is distributed as freeware (with adware) as well as being bundled with All Search. (Gen: generic Trojan)   Why is the All Search virus considered very dangerous?  The All Search virus is extremely dangerous because of it's malicious capabilities.  AllSearch can track information and trace online activity.  Allsearch allows other malware access to your computer such as adware, spyware, and trojans which can be used for extortion schemes and identity theft.  All Search Virus Symptoms  Symptoms of the All Search virus range. Some infected users may notice only a few symptoms, some may have severe issues, and some infected computer users may never detect any symptoms.  The All Search virus uses browser helper objects (in this case search tools) and infects some users by installing extensions and toolbars (BrowserSeek Toolbar) onto their internet browser which redirects internet users to Allsearch.com or other drive by websites. Some internet users are redirected for every search or webpage they visit.  User initiated browsing and search is redirected to malicious websites while using the internet  High levels of CPU usage is used due to the All Search processes, which can cause systems to crash or become malformed.  The All Search virus may also bundle with adware causing spam advertisements.  How to remove the All Search (Allsearch.com) virus  There are different options to remove browser hijacker viruses.  All Search virus removal options  Antivirus/Anti-Malware Software – Scan and remove malware. Manual Removal – Kill process, remove entries, and remove files. System Restore – Restore your computer to a date and time before infection.  Once the All Search virus is removed from your computer, if your internet settings are still altered, please refer to our tutorial on how to remove the MyStart browser hijacker infection. This article will explain details on how to remove malicious extensions/toolbars and how to repair internet settings back to normal.  Depending on your internet browser you can chose to block Browser Seek IP addresses and URLs. This is not a necessity and will not remove the infection but will block adware displayed by Browser Seek. We have written a previous article concerning Text Enhance adware which details how to block URLs using different options per browser. If you wish to block All Search and Browser Seek IP addresses or URLs please refer to the previous post and use the URLs described below. BrowserSeek also uses the sub: upgrade.browserseek.com.  http://browserseek.com http://allsearch.com  1. Antivirus/Anti-Malware Software  Removing the All Search infection is simple using Malwarebytes. Not many removal software besides Malwarebytes has samples for the All Search virus, therefore are not suggested.  Install Malwarebytes (free or paid versions) Scan and remove malware  To learn more about Antivirus software please click here.  2. Manual Removal  The Allsearch.com virus creates values and files on an infected system. Removing them all will also remove the virus.  Kill Process  The first step in remove a browser hijacker is to kill the process to stop the infection from currently running.  1. Press Ctrl+Shift+ESC to enter Window's Task Manager  2. On the "Processes" tab find the random All Search virus process and remove it. The processes may be titled similar to the Browser Seek processes described below.  browserseek.exe browserseek170.exe browserseek.dll allsearch.exe allsearch.dll  Remove Registry Entries (Values)  Remove the registry values created by All Search.  1. Type regedit into the Window's Start Menu search field and press Enter to access Window's Registry Editor.  2. Search for the registry values below and remove them.  HKEY_LOCAL_MACHIN
In our modern world there exist certain institutions of power. Not government committees, alphabet agencies, corporate lobbies, or even standard military organizations; no, these are the mere "middle-men" of power. The errand boys. The well paid hitmen of the global mafia. They are not the strategists or the decision makers.   Instead, I speak of institutions which introduce the newest paradigms. Who write the propaganda. Who issue the orders from on high. I speak of the hubs of elitism which have initiated nearly every policy mechanism of our government for the past several decades. I am talking about the Council On Foreign Relations, the Tavistock Institute, the Heritage Foundation (a socialist organization posing as conservative), the Bilderberg Group, as well as the corporate foils that they use to enact globalization, such as Monsanto, Goldman Sachs, JP Morgan, the Carlyle Group, etc.   Many of these organizations and corporations operate a revolving door within the U.S. government. Monsanto has champions, like Donald Rumsfeld who was on the board of directors of its Searle Pharmaceuticals branch, who later went on to help the company force numerous dangerous products including Aspartame through the FDA. Goldman Sachs and JP Morgan have a veritable merry-go-round of corrupt banking agents which are appointed to important White House and Treasury positions on a regular basis REGARDLESS of which party happens to be in office. Most prominent politicians are all members of the Council on Foreign Relations, an organization which has openly admitted on multiple occasions that their goal is the destruction of U.S. sovereignty and the formation of a "one world government" or "supranational union" (their words, not mine).   However, one organization seems to rear its ugly head at the forefront of the most sweeping mass propaganda operations of our time, and has been linked to the creation of the most atrocious military methodologies, including the use of false flag events. I am of course referring to the Rand Corporation, a California based "think tank" whose influence reaches into nearly every sphere of our society, from politics, to war, to entertainment.   The Rand Corporation deals in what I would call "absolute gray". The goal of the group from its very inception was to promote a social atmosphere of moral ambiguity in the name of personal and national priority. They did this first through the creation of "Rational Choice Theory"; a theory which prescribes that when making any choice, an individual (or government) must act as if balancing costs against benefits to arrive at an action that maximizes personal advantage. Basically, the ends justify the means, and moral conscience is not a factor to be taken seriously if one wishes to be successful.   Hilariously, rational choice theory has been attacked in the past by pro-socialist (collectivist) critics as "extreme individualism"; a philosophy which gives us license to be as "self serving" as possible while feeling patriotic at the same time. In reality, the socialists should have been applauding Rand Corporation all along.   What Rand had done through its propaganda war against the American people was to infuse the exact culture of selfishness needed to push the U.S. towards the socialist ideal. At the onset of any communist or national socialist society (sorry socialists, but they do indeed come from the same collectivist mindset), the masses are first convinced to hand over ultimate power to the establishment in order to safeguard THEMSELVES, not others. That is to say, the common collectivist man chooses to hand over his freedoms and participate in totalitarianism not because he wants what is best for the world, but because he wants what is best for himself, and he believes servitude to the system will get him what he wants with as little private sacrifice as possible (you know, except for his soul…).   The psychologist Carl Jung notes in his observations of collectivism in Nazi Germany and Stalinist Russia that most citizens of those nations did not necessarily want the formation of a tyrannical oligarchy, but, they went along with it anyway because they feared for their own comfort and livelihoods. Many a German supported the Third Reich simply because they did not want to lose a cushy job, or a steady paycheck, or they liked that the "trains ran on time". Socialism is by far the most selfish movement in history, despite the fact that they claim to do what they do "for the greater good of the greater number".   Rand also used Rational Choice Theory as a means to remove questions of principle from the debate over social progress. Rational Choice propaganda commonly presents the target audience with a false conundrum. A perfect example would be the hardcore propaganda based television show '24' starring Kiefer Sutherland, in which a government "anti-terrorism" agent is faced with a controlled choice scenario in nearly every episode. This choice almost always ends with the agent being forced to set aside his morals and conscience to torture, kill, and destroy without mercy, or, allow millions
Independent news is more important than ever. Sign up to get the best of The Nation in your inbox every weekday. You will receive occasional promotional offers for programs that support The Nation's journalism. You can read our Privacy Policy here. Sign up to get the best of The Nation in your inbox every weekday.  Thank you for signing up. For more from The Nation, check out our latest issue  Subscribe now for as little as $2 a month!  Support Progressive Journalism The Nation is reader supported: Chip in $10 or more to help us continue to write about the issues that matter. The Nation is reader supported: Chip in $10 or more to help us continue to write about the issues that matter.  Fight Back! Sign up for Take Action Now and we'll send you three meaningful actions you can take each week. You will receive occasional promotional offers for programs that support The Nation's journalism. You can read our Privacy Policy here. Sign up for Take Action Now and we'll send you three meaningful actions you can take each week.  Thank you for signing up. For more from The Nation, check out our latest issue  Travel With The Nation Be the first to hear about Nation Travels destinations, and explore the world with kindred spirits. Be the first to hear about Nation Travels destinations, and explore the world with kindred spirits.  Sign up for our Wine Club today. Did you know you can support The Nation by drinking wine?  It has become clear that the only way to deal with the most serious economic issues facing our country—inequality, underemployment, wage stagnation—is not just to elect a Democrat as president in the November elections but to completely destroy the Republican Party. To do so, we will have to think beyond particular candidates and specific elections. We will have to think more radically, to propose more fundamental reforms. The Constitution of 1787 offers far too many nooks and crannies in the cobwebbed architecture of our political system in which Republicans can hide out and bide their time before attempting another hostile takeover of our democracy. Because the founders-approved option of amending the Constitution is, for the time being, unavailable to us, we will have to figure out ways of amending it without formally amending it, in order to end the artificially enhanced prominence of a party that has been so malignant in its current form. Ad Policy  First, we need a plan to immediately end the gerrymandering of congressional districts. Without taking this step, there could be no hope of returning the people's chamber to the people's hands. If we wait until after the next census, in 2020, it will be too late. By then, even if the Democrats win by a landslide in 2016, the GOP will have returned.  For starters, if they do not take back the House of Representatives in the fall, Democrats should file lawsuits in the courts arguing that the gerrymandering of congressional districts is a violation of the Constitution, which nowhere explicitly confers on the states the power to gerrymander, or even to create congressional districts. (One section of federal law, 2 U.S.C. 2c, may do so, but it, too, says nothing about gerrymandering.) The states cannot claim the power under the 10th Amendment, which "reserves" powers that the states would have had prior to adoption of the US Constitution. The states cannot logically be said to have had the power to organize their delegations to a body that did not yet exist.  In past attempts to end gerrymandering, Democrats have practically tried to lose. They haven't really wanted to end the practice in its entirety—only a particular GOP-favored form of it that is derided as "going too far." This is because many Democrats in the House, even when they are in the chamber's minority, have ridiculously safe seats thanks to gerrymandering. This is important for progressives to understand: It hasn't only been the conservative bloc on the Supreme Court that has kept gerrymandering in place. It's also because our own side keeps making incoherent arguments that "some" gerrymandering is okay. If we were able to get rid of gerrymandering entirely, any consideration of voter registration data in drawing up boundaries of congressional districts would be impermissible. There would not be the current need to show "intent," much less the requirement of proving that one party has been "shut out" from representation, whatever that means.
Being The Glute Guy's girlfriend has its drawbacks. My fiancee Diana constantly finds herself serving as a guinea pig when I want to test out a new hypothesis. In September of 2013, I shared with you The Hip Thrust Only Experiment, where I altered Diana's training from a routine focused on squats and deadlifts to a routine focused on hip thrusts. The results? No weight change (which was to be expected since her diet didn't change), no change in hip or thigh measurements (I predicted greater hip size and lesser thigh size, but it was only a 6-week experiment and she had been doing hip thrusts during her powerlifting training), and a reduction in waist circumference (presumably due to less erector spinae activation). This was a cool experiment, since it showed that it is indeed possible to maintain glute size if one drops out squats and deadlifts and keeps hammering hip thrusts.  Recently, I decided to conduct another informal n=1 experiment. For the past five months, Diana has been away – her clinical rotations for nurse anesthesia school are scattered across the United States. Due to her travels, she hasn't been able to train with me. She also doesn't have a gym membership, so she hadn't been doing any weight training, just jogging, hiking, and some bodyweight squats and single leg hip thrusts twice per week when she jogged. Six weeks ago, we were reunited for our friends' wedding, and to my dismay I saw that her butt had shrunken significantly. Diana was the one to point this out, and she asked me what she could do to maintain her glute size since she hates losing her booty. I wish I'd taken measurements at this time, but I didn't have access to a tape measure.  I advised her to just start doing Jane Fonda style exercise everyday. Some of you will recall that my friend Nathalia Melo trains her glutes almost daily, so I was eager to see how this strategy would pan out. Keep in mind that Diana doesn't have any access to weights, so I told her to simply alternate between a bunch of floor glute exercises, spending around 20 minutes per day targeting the glutes. She decided to superset her training, performing one set of each of the following around exercises 5 days per week (it takes her around 20 total minutes to complete):  1A. side lying clam – 30 reps  1B. side lying hip abduction – 30 reps  2A. single leg glute bridge – 30 reps  2B. quadruped hip extension from elbows – 30 reps  3. side lying clam raise – 20 reps  4A. quadruped leg swing – 25 reps  4B. fire hydrant – 25 reps  Note that the "A" and "B" denote supersets. Say you're supersetting single leg glute bridges with quadruped hip extensions. You'd perform 30 reps of single leg glute bridges with the right leg, then 30 reps of quadruped hip extensions with the right leg without resting, then repeat with the left leg. Around 2-3 minutes of rest is taken between each set or superset.  I'm currently visiting her in Montana, and I'm astonished at the rapid results. In just six weeks, her butt is markedly bigger and rounder. If I had to guess, I'd say that she's easily put on 1-1.5 inches in this short time-frame (keep in mind that she has a muscle memory effect going on due to her prior training). In fact, her butt is almost back to full size just from doing high rep Jane Fonda exercise. The largest her hips have ever been is 37.5″, and this is when she was squatting 135 x 20 reps, deadlifting 135 x 20 reps, and glute bridging 135 x 20 reps (she could also squat 225 lbs for 1 rep, deadlift 265 lbs for 1 rep, and hip thrust 275 x 12 reps). As you can see, her glutes have reclaimed their size from high rep basic bodyweight exercises performed in the supine, side-lying, and quadruped positions. Not only that, her waist is down an inch (presumably due to the lack of erector and abdominal activation). Here is how her measurements have changed over the past year and a half.  HERE is a video of Diana's first and only powerlifting meet, HERE is a video of Diana's low volume squat/deadlift focus training, HERE is a video of Diana's hip thrust focus training, and HERE is a video from 4 years ago where Diana showcased a bunch of bodyweight glute exercises.  After my PhD is completed, I would love to conduct a study comparing the effects of 1) powerlifting style training (primarily squats and deadlifts twice per week), 2) Jane Fonda style training (high rep floor work five times per week), and 3)
I'm a fujoshi.(The rulesets demand me to write shit even though I don't know what I'm talking about, and at the same time prevents me to link an image that'll explain things better than a thousand words)
View the most recent version.  Information identified as archived is provided for reference, research or recordkeeping purposes. It is not subject to the Government of Canada Web Standards and has not been altered or updated since it was archived. Please " contact us " to request a format other than those available.  Aboriginal women with higher levels of education had slightly higher employment rates than non-Aboriginal women in 2011. Specifically, 81.8% of Aboriginal women with a certificate, diploma or degree at the bachelor level or above were employed, compared with 79.5% of their non-Aboriginal counterparts. The same pattern held true for all three Aboriginal identity groups: First Nations, Métis and Inuit women.  These results highlight the importance of education, especially as Aboriginal women are generally less likely than non-Aboriginal women to have a postsecondary qualification. In general, Aboriginal women are also less likely to be employed than their non-Aboriginal counterparts.  These findings are taken from a new chapter, "First Nations, Métis and Inuit Women," which is part of the seventh edition of Women in Canada: A Gender-based Statistical Report, released today. The chapter examines some of the demographic, cultural and socioeconomic characteristics of the Aboriginal female population. Wherever possible, information is provided for First Nations, Métis and Inuit women separately.  Aboriginal females make up 4% of female population in Canada  There were 718,500 Aboriginal women and girls in Canada in 2011, accounting for 4% of the female population. Of the women and girls who identified as an Aboriginal person, 61% reported a First Nations identity, 32% identified as Métis, and 4% reported an Inuit identity. The remaining women and girls reported multiple Aboriginal identities or did not identify with an Aboriginal group, but reported having registered Indian status and/or band membership.  Aboriginal women are less likely to have postsecondary qualifications  In 2011, half (51%) of Aboriginal women aged 25 to 64 had a postsecondary qualification, compared with 65% of their non-Aboriginal counterparts. However, there were differences among the Aboriginal identity groups. The proportion of Métis women with a postsecondary education was 57%, while it was 47% for First Nations women and 36% for Inuit women.  Despite the gap between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal women, data show that younger Aboriginal women had higher levels of education than older Aboriginal women. For example, 14% of Aboriginal women aged 35 to 44 had a university degree compared with 10% of those aged 55 to 64. A similar pattern was observed for all three Aboriginal groups.  At higher levels of educational attainment, Aboriginal women have slightly higher employment rates than non-Aboriginal women  Aboriginal women aged 25 to 64 (60.1%) were less likely than non-Aboriginal women of the same age group (71.4%) to be part of the paid work force in 2011. However, data show that among women who are university graduates, Aboriginal women (81.8%) had slightly higher employment rates than non-Aboriginal women (79.5%).  The gap in employment rates was much larger among women who did not have a certificate, diploma or degree. For example, 35.5% of Aboriginal women without a certificate, diploma or degree were employed, compared with 46.6% of their non-Aboriginal counterparts, a gap of 11.1 percentage points. Among women with a high school diploma or equivalent certificate, 59.2% for Aboriginal women were employed compared with 65.6% of non-Aboriginal women, a gap of 6.4 percentage points.  Median income of Aboriginal women increases with education level  In 2010, the median income of Aboriginal women aged 15 and older was $19,289. That was about $5,500 less than the median income of their non-Aboriginal counterparts ($24,842).  The 2011 National Household Survey shows that median income was higher for Aboriginal women with higher education levels. For example, the median income for Aboriginal women aged 25 to 64 with no certificate, diploma or degree was $15,208 compared with $49,947 for Aboriginal women with a university certificate, diploma or degree at the bachelor level or above.  Furthermore, the median income of Aboriginal women aged 25 to 64 with a university certificate, diploma or degree at the bachelor level or above was slightly higher than that of their non-Aboriginal counterparts. Specifically, Aboriginal women who were university graduates had a median income of $49,947 compared with $47,742 for non-Aboriginal women with the same level of education.  Note to readers The results presented in this release are from the 2011 National Household Survey and include the on-reserve population
For First Time in Modern Era, Living With Parents Edges Out Other Living Arrangements for 18- to 34-Year-Olds  Share living with spouse or partner continues to fall  Broad demographic shifts in marital status, educational attainment and employment have transformed the way young adults in the U.S. are living, and a new Pew Research Center analysis of census data highlights the implications of these changes for the most basic element of their lives – where they call home. In 2014, for the first time in more than 130 years, adults ages 18 to 34 were slightly more likely to be living in their parents' home than they were to be living with a spouse or partner in their own household.  This turn of events is fueled primarily by the dramatic drop in the share of young Americans who are choosing to settle down romantically before age 35. Dating back to 1880, the most common living arrangement among young adults has been living with a romantic partner, whether a spouse or a significant other. This type of arrangement peaked around 1960, when 62% of the nation's 18- to 34-year-olds were living with a spouse or partner in their own household, and only one-in-five were living with their parents.  By 2014, 31.6% of young adults were living with a spouse or partner in their own household, below the share living in the home of their parent(s) (32.1%). Some 14% of young adults were heading up a household in which they lived alone, were a single parent or lived with one or more roommates. The remaining 22% lived in the home of another family member (such as a grandparent, in-law or sibling), a non-relative, or in group quarters (college dormitories fall into this category).  It's worth noting that the overall share of young adults living with their parents was not at a record high in 2014. This arrangement peaked around 1940, when about 35% of the nation's 18- to 34-year-olds lived with mom and/or dad (compared with 32% in 2014). What has changed, instead, is the relative share adopting different ways of living in early adulthood, with the decline of romantic coupling pushing living at home to the top of a much less uniform list of living arrangements.  Among young adults, living arrangements differ significantly by gender. For men ages 18 to 34, living at home with mom and/or dad has been the dominant living arrangement since 2009. In 2014, 28% of young men were living with a spouse or partner in their own home, while 35% were living in the home of their parent(s). For their part, young women are on the cusp of crossing over this threshold: They are still more likely to be living with a spouse or romantic partner (35%) than they are to be living with their parent(s) (29%).  In 2014, more young women (16%) than young men (13%) were heading up a household without a spouse or partner. This is mainly because women are more likely than men to be single parents living with their children. For their part, young men (25%) are more likely than young women (19%) to be living in the home of another family member, a non-relative or in some type of group quarters.  A variety of factors contribute to the long-run increase in the share of young adults living with their parents. The first is the postponement of, if not retreat from, marriage. The median age of first marriage has risen steadily for decades. In addition, a growing share of young adults may be eschewing marriage altogether. A previous Pew Research Center analysis projected that as many as one-in-four of today's young adults may never marry. While cohabitation has been on the rise, the overall share of young adults either married or living with an unmarried partner has substantially fallen since 1990.  In addition, trends in both employment status and wages have likely contributed to the growing share of young adults who are living in the home of their parent(s), and this is especially true of young men. Employed young men are much less likely to live at home than young men without a job, and employment among young men has fallen significantly in recent decades. The share of young men with jobs peaked around 1960 at 84%. In 2014, only 71% of 18- to 34-year-old men were employed. Similarly with earnings, young men's wages (after adjusting for inflation) have been on a downward trajectory since 1970 and fell significantly from 2000 to 2010. As wages have fallen, the share of young men living in the home of their parent(s) has risen.  Economic factors seem to explain less of why young adult women are increasingly likely to live at home. Generally, young women have had growing success in the paid labor market since 1960 and hence might increasingly be expected to be able to afford to live independently of their parents. For women, delayed marriage—which
Kashmir: New Islamic State Backed by New York Times, BBC Translations of this item: Polish Jihadis, trained and armed by Pakistan, are purging Kashmir of its native Hindu and Sikh population, and waging a terrorist campaign to carve out a separate Islamic country in that part of India.  What the New York Times did not say is that these "boys with guns" are members of Hizb-ul-Mujahideen, a group designated as a terrorist organisation by both the European Union and the United States.  After being at the forefront of gun control campaigns in the U.S. for decades, the New York Times finally supports "open carry" -- but only for terrorists waging jihad against "infidels."  India is not "occupying" Kashmir, which is already part of India. India is waging a war against Islamic terrorism, which has claimed the lives of more than 4,800 Indian civilians and more than 2,400 Indian security personnel. Indian security forces are again waging pitched battles with violent Islamists on the streets of the Muslim-majority province of Kashmir. Mobs began congregating in towns on July 9, after the customary Friday prayers, to protest the killing the previous day by Indian security forces of a prominent Islamic terrorist, Burhan Wani. The protestors waved black ISIS flags and pelted stones at riot police. The riots have so far claimed 49 lives, including 2 policemen. The mainstream media in the West have been quick to point the finger of blame on India for using -- as BBC puts it -- "excessive force." "Allegations that the forces are trigger happy in the region have been a common criticism for years," the BBC said. The mainstream media, however, did not take into account that more than 1,500 members of the Indian police and army were injured by the mobs. Germany's state-run Deutsche Welle featured a Pakistan-based social media campaign that criticised the use of BB guns by Indian riot police against stone-throwing mobs of Islamists. The New York Times criticised the Indian Army for "escalating" the situation by confronting the armed Islamic terrorists in the first place: "A dozen boys with a few guns -- they were no threat to the Indian army, one of the largest in the world. There is no record of Burhan and his crew waging any attack. Their rebellion was symbolic, a war of images against India's continuing occupation of Kashmir, where about half a million of its soldiers, paramilitary and armed police are still stationed." What New York Times did not say is that these "boys with guns" are members of Hizb-ul-Mujahideen, a group designated as a terrorist organisation by both the European Union and the United States. India is not "occupying" Kashmir, which is already part of India. They are waging a war against Islamic terrorism which has claimed the lives of more than 4,800 Indian civilians and more than 2,400 Indian security personnel. The New York Times styled the dead terrorist, Burhan Wani, as if he were an affable gun-rights activist with a large Facebook following: "He built up a following on social media, posting pictures of himself and his associates in combat fatigues, often carrying arms." After being at the forefront of gun control campaigns in U.S. for decades, the New York Times finally supports "open carry" -- but only for terrorists waging jihad against "infidels." With reverence, the New York Times describes Wani, the "internet sensation" who had put "together a small band of Kashmiri militants. Barely out of their teens, they had taken to the forest and social media." Elsewhere they called him a "22-year-old separatist who wanted an independent Kashmir and had built up a following on social media among disaffected Indian Kashmiri youth." Undoubtedly, Burhan Wani created a "social media sensation" among Muslim youth in Kashmir, as do all those gruesome ISIS beheading videos among Muslim youth in Middle East, North Africa and Europe. The mainstream media, quick to blame India for the ongoing unrest, will not tell its readers how the province of Kashmir became the Islamist hellhole that it is today. The minarets of the mosques, reserved in times of peace for prayer calls, proclaimed armed jihad against Hindus in towns and cities across the province. Kashmiri Hindus were given three options: either to convert to Islam, leave their ancestral homes, or face certain death. "Eviction notices" were handed out to the leader of Hindu and Sikh community. The notices read: "We order you to leave Kashmir immediately, otherwise your children will be harmed -- we are not scaring you, but this land is only for Muslims, and is the land of Allah. Sikhs and Hindus cannot stay here". The notice ended with a threat; "If you do not obey, we will start with your children." In an ultimate act of humiliation, Hindu men were told to move out of Kashmir without taking their property or women. Hamas
10 stars out of 5. This is insanely good. My tester disappeared in a few minutes, which is unusual, as I usually take some time getting to know what I'm vaping before just blowing through it. ID10-T is right. Anton and LA Watermelon are the perfect couple. The balancing act between these two is masterfully done here. I found that if I mix this 80/20 VG/PG, there's no throat hit whatsoever, even as a SNV, yet the flavour holds up without any problems.  User: ID10-T Score: 5 Entered: over 1 year ago  First of all, this is a Strap-On recipe, one of the early ones, way ahead of the recent phenomenon. Stacks on Deck even sounds like "Strap On Dick" and on the off chance that wasn't intentional, it was at least a subconscious connection. Secondly, this is a mouthwatering, exciting fruity combo. Anton and LA Watermelon seem made for each other. It has some throat when fresh for me, but still delicious and more tart. However, let it steep for two weeks and it's juicy goodness that goes in super smooth like apple and watermelon jolly ranchers lubed up with a little strawberry syrup and is hard as hell to put down.
Two years after NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden revealed the vast reach of U.S. and U.K. surveillance, the U.S. Congress rolled back the most manifestly unconstitutional element: the bulk collection of domestic phone data.  The U.K. government, on Wednesday, chose to double down instead.  The newly unveiled text of what critics are calling a proposed "Snooper's Charter" or "Hacker's License" would explicitly authorize the bulk collection of domestic data, require telecommunications companies to store records of websites visited by every citizen for 12 months for access by the government, approve the government's right to hack into and bug computers and phones, severely restrict the ability of citizens to raise questions about secret surveillance warrants or evidence obtained through bulk surveillance presented in court, and oblige companies to assist in bypassing encryption.  Prime Minister David Cameron has said terrorists should have no "safe space" to communicate online, and Britain's Home Office — charged with law enforcement, prisons, and border security — has presented in recent years several draft bills with that idea in mind.  The United Kingdom's Home Secretary Theresa May, who is similar to the secretary of state for the U.S., insisted that the engines of Britain's spy agencies would hum along as usual — just more efficiently, and with even more oversight, if the law passed. She answered questions from Parliament about the bill in the House of Commons in London on Wednesday.  There are some new limits in the bill. For example, if police wanted to use phone call information to try and track down a journalist's source, those efforts would now have to be approved by a judicial commissioner. In fact, most warrants would need approval by a judicial commissioner, after the U.K. secretary of state signs off.  But overall, the bill, which May described as "world-leading" in its oversight provisions, remains a concern for privacy advocates because of its massive surveillance authorities and vague language and loopholes.  David Winnick, a parliamentarian from the Labour party and one of the few to offer criticism, told May that he was still "concerned" about the "excessive powers" being given to Britain's spy agencies — a "bitter blow to civil liberties."  Bulk Collection By Law  First, the bill explicitly authorizes bulk collection of domestic data, as long as it is "foreign focused," "necessary in the interests of national security," and approved by the secretary of state and the judicial commissioner. If an agency wants to actually examine domestic data, it has to get a targeted warrant — but massive amounts of data will have already been seized at that point.  "Powers for bulk interception that the government has long undertaken in secret have finally been explicitly avowed, but the case for them remains uncritically examined and evidentially weak," wrote Privacy International in its initial statement about the bill.  May insisted that bulk collection is not a new power — that it was previously authorized under the Telecommunications Act.  However, the new standard is incredibly far-reaching. The United States Second Circuit ruled earlier this year that bulk collection of domestic communications data is so exceptionally broad as to be illegal, and in 2013 a District Court judge in Washington, D.C., found the program likely violated the U.S. constitution's prohibition on general warrants. Congress ultimately decided to end the program and force the National Security Agency to replace it with something less intrusive.  Collection of Browsing History  Additionally, the bill would authorize British intelligence agencies to access a year's worth of information about what websites British people visit without prior court approval. May did acknowledge this was a new power, but insisted it wasn't all that intrusive, because a warrant would still be required to access specific browsing history for every page on every website visited, instead of just the homepage URL (like the Intercept homepage versus a specific article).  Anne Jellema, CEO of the Web Foundation, expressed concerns about the bill's mass surveillance of Internet records.  "It will hurt U.K. businesses, create new vulnerabilities for criminals to attack, and ride roughshod over the right to privacy," she wrote. "It will be possible to paint an incredibly detailed picture of a person's hopes, fears and activities, and will create a data pool rife for theft, misuse or political persecution."  British citizens also aren't confident the government will protect all that new data it would now be entitled to. According to a poll conducted by British human rights group Big Brother Watch in 2012 — when a more severe surveillance bill was on the table — 71 percent of people said they didn't think the government could keep their data, like websites visited, secure. Though the new bill isn't as intrusive, this new power over website history remains.  License to Hack  The government will also create a new "regime" that will be granted authority to "interfere" with "electronic equipment" — basically to hack into devices and
Ronda Rousey KO's Floyd Mayweather ... With Dom. Violence Shot  Ronda Rousey -- KOs Floyd Mayweather ... With Dom. Violence Shot  Ronda Rousey is afraid of NO ONE -- not even Floyd Mayweather ... ripping the fighter over his domestic violence history on LIVE TV.  Rousey had just been given the "Best Fighter" award on the red carpet at the ESPYs -- beating out fighters like Mayweather.  When asked how she felt about it, Ronda replied -- "I wonder how Floyd feels being beaten by a woman for once."  Boom.
Remember growing up as a kid, what did you do? Play with LEGO, annoy your neighbours by ringing their doorbell and running away as fast as you can, or wait for the ice cream truck to come?  Move over. The kids of 2014 are way past that, they already mapped out where the ice cream truck stops and the shortest way to get there for the freshest ice cream of the day.  As a girl, you now no longer have limited options of things to play with. Goldie Blox is a toy company out to show the world that girls deserve more choices than dolls and princesses. They believe that femininity is strong and girls will build the future — literally. Because being a 9-year old girl, doesn't mean you cannot start your own company by coding an app that makes setting up playdates way easier.  Engineering is just a little part of the genius kids that are growing up right now. The kids from 2014 can pick from several options like Cody the Coder, Tynker or Codecademy to learn everything from building websites, to letting a machine do exactly what they want.  Forbes also tells its readers: "Now a growing realisation among educators that this needs to be filled is prompting a new revolution, in the belief that teaching children how to code will give them a skill for life." And to not let them fade away behind a screen, they can try their skills out at the Kids Hack Day events that are popping up everywhere.  From Mark Zuckerburg and Bill Gates to Will.i.am, people all over the world are trying to get kids to code.  "Code Stars" — Short Film  So, think before you buy another useless toy for your kid for Christmas. They might have a Raspberry Pi kit on their wish list.  Follow VBAT on Twitter | Like us on Facebook  written by Annet Kloprogge  Creative at VBAT
Former (sadly) Bruin Shawn Thornton, Red Sox slugger Mike Napoli, TV gals Sorboni Banerjee, Nelly Carreno and Abby Chin, the Herald's Jen Royle and JAM'N 94.5's Ramiro strutting their stuff with some four­-legged friends to raise dough for PAWS New England, Last Hope K9 Rescue, Lucky Lab Rescue and the MSPCA at the annual Rescue the Runway fashion show and fundraiser at The Colonnade Hotel ...  The article you requested has been archived All coverage within bostonherald.com from the last 14 days remains free of charge. Articles do not always include original photos, charts or graphics. » Click here to search for this article within the archive.
King Richard III has been dead for more than 500 years, but his bones continue to ignite fresh controversy.  The medieval king, unearthed from a Leicester parking lot in 2012, has been the center of debate over where and how his body should be reburied. Now, a plan to sequence the full genome of Richard III has brought new strife.  "Why is the University of Leicester doing this, and why is it doing it without any consultation?" said John Ashdown-Hill, an independent historian involved with the search for the bones. The DNA testing will add very little to scientific knowledge, and it breaks agreements with Buckingham Palace made before the University got involved in the Richard III search, Ashdown-Hill told Live Science. [See Photos of the Search of King Richard III]  "We're talking about a member of the royal family and a former head of state," he said.  A lost king – and controversy  Richard III died in 1485, a victim on the field at the Battle of Bosworth, part of the English War of the Roses. Historical records held that his battered body was taken to Leicester and buried, but the grave was lost in the early 1600s.  The search for Richard III's body was sparked by the Richard III Society, a group of historical enthusiasts who call themselves Richardians. Ashdown-Hill is a part of the Looking for Richard team that got the ball rolling; he started working to sequence the mitochondrial DNA, which is passed down the maternal line, of Richard III's living descendant in 2003.  Screenwriter and dedicated Richardian Philippa Langley took the lead on the archaeology, urging the Leicester City Council to allow a dig in its building's parking lot, as historical records suggested the lot sat over the site of Greyfriars, the church where Richard III was buried. The Richard III society funded the dig and hired University of Leicester Archaeological Services (ULAS) to do the archaeology. ULAS is an independent group of archaeologists embedded in the University of Leicester's school of archaeology and ancient history.  These players have sometimes clashed with each other, as well was with outsiders. Most prominent are debates over where the king will be reburied. The University of Leicester was granted the exhumation license for the body, making it the institution responsible for the reburial. The plan is to rebury Richard III in Leicester Cathedral. That arrangement has sparked anger from some who claim relation to the king who'd like to see him buried in his adopted hometown of York. And even some who accept a Leicester burial are upset with the modernistic designs for Richard III's tomb.  DNA debate  As a result of the burial controversy, a judicial review of the University of Leicester's custody of the body is ongoing, with a judgment expected in a few weeks. Against this backdrop come the criticisms of a newly announced project to sequence the entire genome of Richard III. The identification of the king's body was made with mitochondrial DNA, which is a limited portion of the body's DNA.  That mitochondrial DNA test was necessary, as Richard III was buried in a shallow grave without a coffin or remaining marker, Ashdown-Hill said. But further testing, he argues, goes against precedent.  "Her Majesty the Queen would not allow exhumation of other royal remains, or the testing of them," Ashdown-Hill said. The hurried circumstances of Richard III's burial and the turmoil at the time are the only reasons his bones don't lie in state like other monarchs, he said — in which case, they would never be studied. [Images: A New Dig at Richard III's Grave]  The only other royal body exhumed was Anne de Mowbray, the 8-year-old Duchess of York, and the child bride of one of Richard III's nephews, one of the two "Princes in the Tower" who were kept in the Tower of London and then vanished when Richard took the throne. (Rumors persist that he had them murdered.) The little Duchess was found accidentally in 1964 on a construction site; her body was not scientifically investigated, and she was reburied in Westminster Abbey in 1965.  "It's breaking the precedent we had in 1965, what's going on at the moment [with Richard III]," Ashdown-Hill said.  Crumbling trust  The controversy also reflects distrust between the University of Leicester and some on the search team not affiliated with the university. The Looking for Richard team instigated the project and fought an uphill battle to get everyone else on board for the actual investigation, Ashdown-Hill said.
After the successful disruption of Milo's talk at Berkeley, Trump memorably took to twitter to complain about "professional anarchists" and "paid protesters." But Trump and his supporters aren't the only ones who've been peddling conspiracy theories about antifa: the World Socialist Web Site (WSWS) recently published a pair of hit pieces aiming to spread the myth that "significant numbers of the hooded anarchists who rioted in Berkeley were police agents or informants."  This kind of lie can have serious consequences, even coming from a relatively obscure and cranky source like the WSWS, so it's worth taking the time to address it properly. It's important to be open to legitimate criticism, and listen to arguments over tactics and strategy, and anarchists and other anti-state communists have never been shy about offering criticisms of antifa, or saying when they think specific tactics like the black bloc can at times be carried out without strategy. But trying to characterise people as police agents goes way beyond this. Accusing people – whether specific individuals or vague categories like "the black bloc" – of being undercover agents isn't a way of opening up a discussion, but of closing it down. You don't calmly talk over your differences with people you think are police officers, you exclude them from your spaces, forcefully if necessary. The WSWS are open about their intentions here: they ask their readers to "identify these provocateurs before they can do their dirty work and throw them out."  Of course, no-one could object to actually unmasking real undercovers, like the people at that protest in Oakland in 2014, or the various people who've done the hard and painful work of identifying infiltrators in their groups and even their personal lives. Providing resources to help people identify and deal with real infiltrators, as anarchists have done in the past, is important. But this has nothing in common with just painting broad political tendencies you dislike as being police agents.  Needless to say, the tactic of trying to discredit dedicated working-class militants and anti-fascists by accusing them of being secret agents was wrong then, and shouldn't be seen as any more acceptable today.  I'm sure there are some undercover agents in some antifa groups and some black blocs; after all, since at least Cointelpro, if not earlier, the state's put a great deal of effort into getting agents everywhere it can. Just off the top of my head, I can also think of undercover agents or informers who've spied on totally liberal peace groups, the families of people murdered by racist or state violence, a collective that provided humanitarian relief in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, people working to save the lives of death row inmates, and the RMT railworkers' union. We wouldn't let these well-documented examples of real state agents make us think that everyone involved in liberal anti-war protests, working with bereaved families affected by racist violence, helping out after a disaster, trying to prevent an execution, or active in a union must be working for the state, and the same logic should apply to antifa and black blocs – and that's before we get onto the fact that the WSWS don't even offer any proof to support their assertions, they just proceed on the basis of "I don't like these people, therefore they must be state."  There's an interesting little irony here, for those who know their history: in the 1930s and 1940s, the Stalinist Communist Parties disagreed with the early Trotskyists, in part because the Trotskyists supported the Spanish revolutionaries against the Republic, and encouraged workers in the Allied countries to go on fighting for their own interests instead of sacrificing everything for the war effort (and so for the defence of the USSR). Rather than arguing these differences out openly and honestly, they preferred to just say that all Trotskyists were secretly working for Hitler. It's remarkable how much the WSWS's call to "identify these provocateurs before they can do their dirty work and throw them out" sounds like it could've come straight from an old anti-Trotskyist smear like "Clear Out Hitler's Agents!"  Needless to say, the tactic of trying to discredit dedicated working-class militants and anti-fascists by accusing them of being secret agents was wrong then, and shouldn't be seen as any more acceptable today.  As the Twin Cities General Defence Committee have pointed out, this kind of "badjacketing" has in fact been used by real, actual state infiltrators before, and one some occasions, as with the sad story of American Indian Movement militant Anna Mae Aquash, has actually led to people losing their lives. When we see how destructive these charges have been to our movements in the past, we can appreciate just how serious they are, and how totally irresponsible it is for the WSWS to throw them around without proof.  The other leg of the WSWS's faulty argument,
Not many popular or exciting fictional characters are born Canadian but superhero and adventurer Wolverine isn't just Canadian, he's an Albertan too. I think it would make a lot of people really proud to live in Edmonton and raise morale to erect a life size statue of this character in City Hall, or even perhaps Churchill Square or the Alberta Legislature Grounds. It would also become an interesting tourist attraction for comic book fans visiting our city.
1). A psychedelic rock band from US. Their first album, which was recorded in Florida, has become a collectors' item and is full of dual guitar work with the extended track Play the stand out song. They relocated to East Lansing, Michigan and Detroit to record their second album and whilst in Michigan they gigged with several local bands like The Rationals, The Woolies and Ormandy. Joey Murcia was also connected with Florida bands. Ex-Birdwatchers and went on to play… read more
At Soma Studios we specialize in a range of therapies that fit your specific needs to ensure you receive a restorative and healing experience.  Treating clients since 2000, Soma Studio has become well-known in Vancouver for registered massage therapy and pregnancy massage. We now offer Chinese Medicine and Acupuncture.  Open seven days per week with two convenient locations, Soma Studio welcomes all ages of women and men to our clinics. Please feel free to contact us with any questions—we look forward to treating you.
By Tim Radford / Climate News Network  Scientists warn that it is only a matter of time before the Great Barrier Reef suffers a fourth episode of mass coral bleaching. (Richard Ling / Flickr)  The Great Barrier Reef, one of the wonders of the Pacific Ocean, may never fully recover from the combined effects of global warming and an El Niño year, according to a new study in one of the world's leading science journals.  And a second study, in a second journal, warns that increased sea surface temperatures have also caused both a major die-off of corals and the collapse of reef growth rates in the Maldives, in the Indian Ocean.  Corals are very sensitive to ocean temperatures, and in unusually hot years – and these have recurred naturally and cyclically since long before humans started burning coal, oil and gas, to accelerate the build-up of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere – the corals react to stress by bleaching. That is, they eject the photosynthesising algae that live with them in symbiosis, to the advantage of both creatures.  But the world's oceans are becoming hotter anyway, because of global warming driven by greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere. The seas are becoming ever more acidic as atmospheric carbon dioxide reacts with the water.  And the periodic return of a blister of oceanic heat in the eastern Pacific called El Niño – Spanish for "The Child", because it becomes most visible around Christmastime – has begun to put the world's reefs at risk. The El Niño of 2015-16 triggered a massive episode of bleaching throughout the tropics. And, Australian researchers say in Nature, the bleaching continues.  "We're hoping that the next two to three weeks will cool off quickly, and this year's bleaching won't be anything like last year. The severity of the 2016 bleaching was off the chart," says Terry Hughes, of Australia's Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies, at James Cook University in Queensland.  "It was the third major bleaching to affect the Great Barrier Reef, following earlier heatwaves in 1998 and 2002. Now we're gearing up to study a potential number four.  "We have now assessed whether past exposure to bleaching in 1998 and 2002 made reefs any more tolerant in 2016. Sadly, we found no evidence that past bleaching makes the corals any tougher."  Researchers have already warned that, unless there is urgent action to limit global warming by drastically reducing dependence on fossil fuel as an energy source, severe bleaching could damage 99% of the world's coral reefs.  The reefs are among the richest ecosystems on the planet, and they provide vital coastal protection for human settlements as well as a source of sustainable protein for human economies.  "It broke my heart to see so many corals dying on northern reefs on the Great Barrier Reef in 2016," says Professor Hughes. "With rising temperatures due to global warming, it's only a matter of time before we see more of these events. A fourth event after only one year is a major blow to the Reef."  British scientists saw much the same devastation from the same El Niño bleaching around the Maldives in the Indian Ocean, they write in Scientific Reports journal. And the big question now is: how quickly can the Indian Ocean reefs recover?  "Recovery from similar past disturbances in the Maldives has taken 10-15 years, but major bleaching events are predicted to become far more frequent than this. If this is the case it could lead to long-term loss of reef growth and so limit the coastal protection and habitat services these reefs presently provide," says Chris Perry, professor of physical geography at the University of Exeter, UK.  "The most alarming aspect of this coral die-off event is that it has led to a rapid and very large decline in the growth rate of the reefs.  "This in turn has major implications not only for the capacity of these reefs to match any increases in sea-level, but because it is also likely to lead to a loss of the surface structure of the reefs that is so critical for supporting fish species diversity and abundance."
(Corrects owner of Olive Young chain to CJ Corp in paragraph 5)  By Hooyeon Kim  SEOUL, Oct 24 (Reuters) - Looks no longer centre only on the face in beauty-obsessed South Korea, where more women are hitting the gym to improve muscle tone and physical health.  As the ideal of beauty evolves in a country that is a trendsetter in cosmetics and the pursuit of plastic surgery, women's fitness has become a growth business, say purveyors of health products, from diet supplements to dumb-bells.  "Women used to starve in order to lose weight. Now they exercise," said celebrity trainer Ray Yang, who leads a workout session during the Body Show, a weekly television event targeted at women that is now in its second season.  South Korea is a beauty powerhouse, with a $12-billion cosmetics industry and home-grown brands from the likes of Amorepacific Corp and LG Household & Healthcare riding a wave, or "hallyu", of cultural exports, from television dramas to pop music.  In July, Olive Young, a health and beauty chain owned by CJ Corp, began selling health products targeted at women, including dumb-bells and a mini gym ball.  Lotte Shopping's rival chain LOHB's said annual sales of items such as gym balls, jump ropes and dumb-bells were up 9 percent this year by Oct. 15.  As in other Asian countries, the popular depiction of Korean women has tended towards the slim, fair-skinned and demure, reinforcing gender stereotypes in a male-dominated society.  Until recently, physical fitness was not much of a priority for Korean women, despite an emphasis on appearance that has fuelled a $5-billion plastic surgery industry, which accounts for a quarter of the global market.  Thinness was so prized that young women often steered clear of sports such as hiking and cycling, for fear they would leave them with thicker legs.  "Women used to think muscles would have side effects, or negative effects, on their body type and looks," said Kim Min-jeong, a professor of global sports science at Hankuk University of Foreign Studies.  The desire for a more robust physique comes as female workforce participation reached a record high this year, while Koreans of both sexes are delaying marriage and childbirth.  Many fitness conscious Korean women are adopting as role models well-toned celebrities, from domestic K-pop girl group Sistar's Hyorin, to global figures such as U.S. first lady Michelle Obama and Kate Middleton, the Duchess of Cambridge.  "The strength, the outer beauty of muscles, the positive attitudes and energetic images of these women become the motivation," said Kim. "Women now have higher social status and bigger roles in society."  The number of fitness centres registered in South Korea has increased steadily, growing more than 5 percent last year to stand at 7,363 outlets, government data show.  At one exercise centre in Seoul recently, 29-year-old You Ri-seul followed the same routine as the men, from barbell drills to a rowing-machine session and dead lifts.  "Female celebrities with healthy images became popular in the mass media in recent years, so I think a more healthy-looking body is ultimately becoming the wannabe model," she said. (Editing by Tony Munroe and Clarence Fernandez)  Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles.
Forest Houses Resort is situated on 20 wooded acres in upper Oak Creek Canyon. The resort is separated from Highway 89A by trees and Oak Creek – a clear, cool, continuously flowing mountain stream stocked with Rainbow and Brown trout and supporting an abundance of birds and wildlife. The canyon walls and multi-colored cliffs of basalt, lava, limestone and sandstone are forested with red maple, aspen, chaparral and seven varieties of oaks.  The canyon floor, 1,500 – 2,000 feet below the rim, is shaded and cooled by giant Ponderosa Pine and Douglas Fir. Oak Creek is lined with lush sycamores, walnuts, alders, willows, flowering shrubs and wildflowers.  Summer temperatures are pleasant, the nights cool. Winter brings several snowfalls as the resort is just above the snowline at an altitude of one mile.  Close to the resort are several spectacular trail walks and scenic hikes varying from relaxing to strenuous and providing opportunities to explore the unusual geological formations and vegetation of the canyon.
March 12, 2016 Caucus  Sitemap  March 12, 2016 Caucus RESULTS   Turnout  Saipan 132 Tinian 16 Rota 41  Preference Group  Votes Pledged Delegates  Delegate  Delegate  Delegate  Delegate  Delegate  Delegate  Alternate  Clinton  102 4  Angelo Villagomez  Janet King  Joseph Hill  Female TBD   Female TBD  De La Fuente  0 0   Sanders  65 2  Stephen C. Woodruff  Female TBD   Vincent Bidez  Uncommitted  22 0   2016 Delegate Selection Plan   2016 Delegate Candidate Form  -Please send completed candidate forms to Chairman Camacho and/or to cnmidemscaucus2016@gmail.com   2016 Caucus Locations (6:00 PM Start Time):   Saipan:  World Resort Royal Taga Ballroom  (*change from earlier announcement)  Tinian:  Tinian: Residence of Mr. David Cing  San Jose, Tinian  (Marpo Valley located next to Carolinas Hill:  Canal St. runs into entrance to Marpo Valley)   Rota:  Residence of Mr. Thomas A. Manglona   Miling Kata An, Rota   Rota:
DENVER – Christian Arroyo is most often lauded as the Giants' top hitting prospect. He's the organization's only position player on Baseball America's Top 100 list.  But the high school kid drafted one round behind him in 2013 is beginning to make some noise – and he is positioning himself to be the next new face promoted to the Giants roster.  Ryder Jones just turned 23 last week and he hit a home run for the third consecutive game Friday for Triple-A Sacramento. He has 10 homers this season and blends some on-base skills (.295/.393/.563) with his power.  Jones is clearly positioning himself as the next player to make his big league debut, ahead of Chris Shaw and Jae-gyun Hwang.  "His confidence has really grown," Giants manager Bruce Bochy said. "He's a power threat. He's a guy I'm watching. He's a guy we don't have here, who has a lot of power."  Jones also has versatility. He has started 22 games at third base, 11 games at first base and 15 games at the two corner outfield spots.  As for Arroyo, he hasn't played since getting hit on the hand with a pitch Wednesday, but X-rays ruled out a fracture and he isn't expected to be out for long.  A reminder: Hwang can opt out of his contract July 1. It's hard to imagine the Giants would let him get away without giving him a look at the big league level. But they also will want to continue to play Eduardo Nuñez in case they can showcase him for a potential trade. So perhaps the Giants can convince Hwang to stick around until nearer to July 31.  Jones is in the same boat as Arroyo when the season began. He's not on the 40-man roster, but he would have to be added after the season to protect him from the Rule 5 draft. So if Jones keeps this up, there's every reason to believe he'll make his major league debut at some point this season.  —  Nuñez (hamstring) is available in an emergency only. He likely won't return to the lineup any earlier than Monday's series opener at Atlanta.  Buster Posey (left ankle) was cleared to catch but he's starting at first base as Brandon Belt gets a day off. Belt somehow went hitless in two games here in which the Giants scored 17 runs. His average is down to .221.  "Belt is going through his struggles," Bochy said. "I want to give him a break, more on the mental side."  Brandon Crawford and Denard Span are also getting a rest day. Joe Panik might rest on Sunday.  —  Any update on Hunter Strickland's appeal?  "I don't even check anymore," Bochy said. "He's on the roster. He's ready to pitch."  It's flat-out ridiculous, and Major League Baseball should be embarrassed that it has left one of its clubs in the lurch for so long without any explanation.  —  Lineups as Matt Cain tries to hold onto his rotation spot and the Giants try to snap a franchise-record seven-game losing streak to the Rockies, who lead them by 17 ½ games in the NL West:
Very good deck. Here are the win conditions.  Tempo: Flamewaker and Spell Overpowerment  Archmage Antonidias: You overwhelm him with spells  Yogg: Yogg can win games on his own  Elise: Once all else fails, she can make your useless spells in the fatigue war useful  If you are playing more aggro than control Blizzard is replaced with Elise. If you are playing more control decks play Elise instead. This deck is insanely fun and great.  Mulligan Guide  Both good cards and could be kept in your mulligan. I am kind of experimenting with these two cards for now.  Cards to Consider Mulligan: Bloodmage Thalnos and Forbidden Flame  Palladin (Deathratte or Aggro): Arcane Blast , Arcane Missiles , Mirror Image , Mana Wyrm , Frostbolt , Sorcerer's Apprentice and Flamewaker . For this match up, you really shouldn't be getting control based cards for the death rattle because if it is aggro you lose. So I would just go for the cards above and not cards like Polymorph  Card Explanations:  Forbidden Flame: Really awesome card. Provides a extremely flexible way to take out minions. Can be used early game to take out low cost, or late game to take out threats. Also no mana spell for Archmage and for Flamewaker.  Arcane Blast: Super good. Allows to control the game early, especially with all of these aggro decks in the current meta.  Arcane Missiles: Flamewaker + Missiles = Tempo. Nuff said.  Mana Wyrm: Tunnel Trogg for Mages? Yes please.  Mirror Image: Great early game card to not only eat damage, but allow you to establish a board. Tanks doom hammer damage, early game zoo damage, and is low cost spells for flamewaker, archmage and even yogg.  Frostbolt: Do I have to explain this card?  Sorcerer's Apprentice: One of the best cards. So many spells when you play this card right, you get a ton of value. Also a good low cost minion to drop to establish a board.  Arcane Intellect: Amazing draw card. Draw 2 for three mana. Amazing value.  Flamewaker: Tempo Tempo Tempo Tempo. Anything else?  Fireball: Can hit face, can kill minions. Great value.  Polymorph: Honestly, maybe two of this card. Tirion? NOPE. Faceless 7/7 guy? NOPE. 30/30 C'thun? NOPE. AMAZING CARD.  Cabalist's Tome: Mages lost Unstable Portal, flame cannon, Dr. Boom. Well at least we got this card. Kind of RNG but great value nonetheless.  Ethereal Conjurer: Better than Azure Drake. Allows you to again get the spell you need, like another polymorph or a spell to push for damage. great card.  Archmage Antonidas: A win condition in itself. Amazing card.  Flamestrike: Need a card to counter aggro. It is amazing against every deck. Might keep in mulligan sometimes. Great great GREAT card.  Bloodmage Thalnos: Spell Damage and Draw? Sure.  Elise Starseeker: After all else fails, you need a win condition. This is it.  Yogg-Saron, Hope's End: MVP. Remember play turn 10, don't wait for 30 spells, play after 7 or more because you will guaranteed get great value.
In recent years, the number of popular reality shows depicting real workers performing hands-on duties has increased significantly. For example, there's the wildly popular A&E reality series Duck Dynasty that features the Robertson family running an extremely successful duck hunting business. The Discovery Channel's Deadliest Catch has been captivating television viewers for ten seasons, depicting commercial crab fishermen hard at work on the Bering Seas. And HGTV's Property Brothers gets into the action, depicting real estate agent Drew Scott searching for fixer-uppers for his client, while his identical twin brother Jonathan utilizes his contracting skills to renovate the homes.  Skilled trades like these have captivated millions, perhaps due to the fascination Americans have with the anomaly that is rewarding and satisfying work. Here, we'll uncover some of the greatest benefits and rewards associated with trades that require working with your hands.  Psychological Benefits  In a May 2012 article in entitled Creativity, Happiness and Your Own Two Hands, psychology professor Dr. Kelly Lambert revealed the results of her study on the effects hand use and cultural habits have on an individual's overall mood. The article, published in Psychology Today showed that hands-on work satisfies a "primal need" to create things. Thus, it was concluded that the overwhelming tendency in American culture to purchase items we need and to use technology to the excess has, in some way, deprived us of an innate need that offers us both pleasure and pride.  Mike Rowe, former host of the Discovery Channel Reality Show Dirty Jobs seems to have similar beliefs where hands-on, "dirty" jobs are concerned. In a December 2008 TED Talk, Rowe shared candidly his views, saying, "When I talk about the show…. I also start to talk about some of the other things I got wrong, some of the other notions of work that I've just been assuming are sacrosanct, and they're not. People with dirty jobs are happier than you think. As a group, they're the happiest people I know."  Intrinsic Rewards  In his 2010 book entitled, The Case for Working With Your Hands: Or Why Office Work Is Bad For Us and Fixing Things Feels Good, author Matthew Crawford explores the so-called 'knowledge work' 'trend that essentially obliterated such high school vocational education programs as shop class, woodworking and other fields. In the book, he quotes shop teacher Doug Stowe's October 2006 Wisdom of the Handsblog post: "In schools, we create artificial learning environments for our children that they know to be contrived and undeserving of their full attention and engagement. Without the opportunity to learn through the hands, the world remains abstract and distant, and the passions for learning will not be engaged."  Ready to Move Forward? Whether you need more information, want to speak to someone, or start the application process, we're with you every step of the way. Contact us to get started on working toward your future. Request More Info  In short, working with the hands provides the type of internal satisfaction that only comes from seeing a job through–start to finish–and being able to look upon that work with pride. And despite some misconceptions to the contrary, working with the hands does require quite a bit of intelligence, wisdom and skill in order to get the job done properly.  Another point eloquently made by Mike Rowe in the aforementioned TED Talk explores the reward that comes from knowing your work makes a difference in the lives and environments of others. Rowe said, "… innovation without imitation is a complete waste of time… Your iPhone without those people making the same interface, the same circuitry, the same board, over and over? All of that? That's what makes it equally as possible as the genius that goes inside of it."  In Demand And Making A Great Living  As important as intrinsic rewards, those seeking hands-on work want to assure that their chosen trade is in-demand and that there are opportunities to earn a great living. Welding, for example, offers opportunities in industries such as construction, aviation, shipbuilding and the automotive industry. HVAC technicians are needed in the construction industry and are called upon by virtually every home, office or warehouse for repair work regularly. Thus, having steady, fulfilling and profitable work is absolutely available in the skilled trades.  In conclusion, for those who want to learn more about skilled trades involving working with their hands can look to qualified trade schools like Tulsa Welding School to get started on the right path.
The Internet is a powerful tool. And like most other powerful tools, it's one that can be used for both good and bad ends. Just as in the real world, there are all sorts of dodgy characters you can run into online. And when it comes to the world of online fundraising, far too many nonprofits are running into a particularly cagey group of bad actors—credit card fraudsters.  This article is the product of our ongoing efforts to stamp out credit card fraud from our site. Just to be clear, we are not talking about people stealing credit cards from our clients or their donors, or in any way compromising the integrity of our platform. We are talking about organized criminal groups that take already-stolen credit cards and then test them through nonprofit checkout pages.  Over time, we have learned a lot about the issues at play and have taken many steps behind the scenes to help address them. Since it's an area that isn't often talked about, and it's one that can wreak havoc on nonprofits, we figured we'd give you the behind the scenes on our experiences.  A Tale of Two Forms  Sophisticated credit card rings love nonprofits. They love, love, love them. And the reason why is obvious if you think about it for a while.  Nonprofits have some of the simplest checkout pages on the web.  If you were in the business of testing stolen credit cards, which would you prefer: a simple one-page checkout form, or a complicated multi-step "shopping cart" checkout? Obviously, you'd prefer the former.  And that's why nonprofits get targeted so often by credit card rings. Unlike other e-commerce applications, donation forms are designed to be simple and static. There's no dynamic shopping cart functionality to contend with, which means that it's a lot easier for credit card rings to write automated scripts that can churn hundreds or thousands of stolen cards through a page every day. Plus, visitors can input any donation amount that they want on a nonprofit checkout form. This lets fraudsters easily test transaction limits on stolen cards.  In short, the very features that make nonprofit donation pages easy to use for legitimate donors also make them attractive targets for credit card rings.  Portrait of a Nonprofit Victim  A little over a year ago we were approached by an existing client. At the time, a credit card ring was targeting this client heavily. Aside from the ethical problem of not wanting to accept contributions that were not freely given, there were other major problems caused by the card testing. When the real card owners discovered the unauthorized charges, they would issue chargebacks with the credit card companies. This would reverse the original transactions and the merchant service would then impose extra fees on the nonprofit for the reversals (standard in the payments industry). The nonprofit was losing money from reversals, having a very tough time keeping legitimate transactions separate from fraudulent ones, and was facing the constant threat of damage to its reputation because of the unauthorized transactions.  When the organization approached us, it was only using StayClassy for peer-to-peer fundraising. It had a separate donation page up on its main website; this was the page that was getting hit continuously by the ring. As the influx of fraudulent charges swelled, the organization decided to try replacing its existing donation form with a StayClassy form. The hope was that the fraudulent charges might abate. Unfortunately, they did not.  Pete vs. the Internet  It was at this point that we got our first real glimpse into the shadowy world of organized credit card theft. It was also when our VP of Engineering, Pete Nystrom, decided he was going to spend some time working on a fix for the problem.  We use a service called Cloudflare at StayClassy. Cloudfare essentially acts as a CDN (content delivery network) that sits between our site and the end user. There are a number of site performance and speed benefits you can get from using a service like Cloudflare, but there are also security benefits.  The initial hope was that some of the security features within Cloudfare would be enough to deter the credit card ring. Among other things, these security features include the ability to automatically block IP addresses and IP ranges that are associated with known threats and to manually block specific IP addresses, ranges, or even entire countries if you want to.  When Pete first started looking into the problem, he immediately noticed that the fraudulent charges weren't emanating from "known threats" in Cloudflare's system (there was essentially no drop off in the rate of fraudulent charges when the client switched its donation page to StayClassy). So, as a logical next step, he began blocking IP addresses and ranges that repeatedly surfaced in connection with false charges.  With a little time, a picture of where the attempts were coming from began to emerge. Most of the IPs associated with the fraudulent charges were located in northern Africa, the Middle
Closeout - Limited to stock on hand. First come, first served. No Backorders.   Leathercraft is a hobby that challenges your creative and hand-working skills, yet is easy and fun to learn. Our deluxe set is a great way to get started as it contains everything needed to make a wallet, smartphone case, belt with keeper and buckle, coin purse, key fob and rounders. The detailed instructions will teach you step-by-step, the techniques of carving, stamping, dyeing, finishing and lacing.  Closeout - Limited to stock on hand. First come, first served. No Backorders.   Leathercraft is a hobby that challenges your creative and hand-working skills, yet is easy and fun to learn. Our deluxe set is a great way to get started as it contains everything needed to make a wallet, smartphone case, belt with keeper and buckle, coin purse, key fob and rounders. The detailed instructions will teach you step-by-step, the techniques of carving, stamping, dyeing, finishing and lacing.
When FORBES rolled out its inaugural Philanthropy Issue last fall, it provoked an unexpected reaction. Yes, there were plenty of compliments, and constructive criticism, too, but the overwhelming sentiment boiled down to this: Please keep the conversation going.  This issue marks a step forward in honoring that request. A century ago, after America's legendary generation of industrialists had created unprecedented fortunes, these great entrepreneurs--led by Carnegie, Rockefeller and Morgan--turned their formidable problem-solving skills (and the entitlement to give that comes with making money yourself) on the era's great social issues. With innovations in technology and finance creating a wave of disruptive megabillionaires, we're now living through a second golden age of philanthropy. And with the planet, and its problems, now stitched together in ways inconceivable in Carnegie's time, this one has the potential to be still more profound.  Governments no longer seem capable of executing big ideas. Ditto for major corporations. It's left to entrepreneurial capitalism to innovate. And modern-day philanthropy taps the same skills, substituting public good for profits in instances where there's not yet an economic interest to do the right thing.  We centered this year's issue on solutions for extreme poverty, from America to Africa. While that's a noble goal worth focusing on, it's also a prism to view the larger scope of philanthropy, whatever your interest. There are lessons here for anyone who believes in market-based, permanent answers to large-scale problems.
It's cool and the epitome of recycling or better reusing. Also I have tires that I could make into the holder when the current one retires, but I don't have the capability to make the reflector. Fortunately it looks like it would last forever. And if you are worried about someone taking it, then just take it off and put it in your pocket. Best of all no batteries required.  Took a while to get here, but it was coming from Australia, so no problem for me. I had to get the rest of my bike working. It's a castaway that needed a little TLC to get back on the road.  The star thingy isn't working, but I'd give it 5 stars. Oh, you have to click on the rating before writing the review. Tricky.
Dwight Howard filled in for longtime Dwight Howard hater Shaquille O'Neal on Inside the NBA last night. Fellow Howard hater Charles Barkley decided this was as good a time as any to ask him why fans dislike Dwight. I am trying to imagine how any retired player asking Barkley this—12 seasons into a Hall of Fame career, no less—would have ended in anything but a brawl, and can't seem to do it. It's worth remembering that, 13 years into Barkley's own career, Barkley threw a 5-foot-nothing guy through a plate glass window at 2 a.m. Perhaps Howard should have brought this up.  Instead, Howard earnestly tried to answer the question. Yes, Howard attempted to explain why people don't like him, instead of brandishing a printout of his Basketball Reference page in Barkley's face and politely inviting him to shut the fuck up.  Here is why people dislike Howard: He's corny. That's pretty much it. Well, that and national media folk like Barkley and Shaq taking shots at him all the time. Howard hasn't been able to lead a team to a title? Funny, neither has Kevin Durant, and people don't hate him. Howard doesn't take everything seriously? Funny, neither does Blake Griffin and people don't hate him. Howard hasn't won MVP? Funny, neither has Chris Paul and people don't hate him. (Much.)  POST CONTINUES BELOW  The next time [barkley] wants to berate an immature Hall of Famer who never won anything, there's no need to find Howard. He should just look in a mirror.  Over his first six seasons, Howard missed a total of three games. By his fourth season, at 22, he was the best center in the NBA. By his fifth he had the Magic in the NBA Finals. Howard won three straight Defensive Player of the Year titles, Barkley may have played defense three possessions in a row once. Howard led the NBA in rebounds five times, something O'Neal never did once. Howard's decline of late has been due more to injury (he had back surgery in 2012) and being a post player in the modern NBA than anything on his part. His shot attempts have decreased while playing with Kobe Bryant and then James Harden? Wow, shocking, never would have guessed.  Dislike of Howard, whose Hall of Fame chances stand around 99 percent as per Basketball Reference, says more about you than it does about him at this point. Expecting him to explain why other people don't like him makes about as much sense as asking why President Obama hasn't ended racism yet. Does, as Howard tried to explain last night, his awkward exit from Orlando play into it? Sure. His preternatural farting ability, too.  POST CONTINUES BELOW  If I could offer one piece of advice to Howard, it would be this: Fight back. When an out-of-touch buffoon like Barkley asks you to explain why people don't like you, turn it around. Ask HIM to explain why HE doesn't like you. When Shaq ridicules you or lays claim to the Superman nickname, ask to see his rebounding titles, or his Defensive Player of the Year awards, or the box score from a NBA Finals win while in Orlando. Better yet, ask Hakeem Olajuwon to induct you into the Hall of Fame.  When Shaq played for the Lakers, every player had their last name on a plaque on their locker. Every player but O'Neal, that is, whose own plaque read IDGAF. Howard has always needed a little more of this. Instead, he's tried to please everyone and in the process became the personification of modern NBA player problems. Even Howard's dunk contest wins—unprecedented for a seven-footer—didn't help him.  Image via Kyle Terada-USA TODAY Sports  At 30, Howard will likely join yet another team this summer. This will probably be portrayed as yet another failure on his part, as if his 8.5 shot attempts per game last season (the lowest since his rookie season, despite shooting a career high 62 percent from the floor) were somehow his fault. Meanwhile, James Harden averaged—averaged!—19.7 shots per game and led the NBA in field goal attempts. The Rockets won 41 games and were eliminated by the Warriors in the first round. Yeah, that worked out great.  POST CONTINUES BELOW  So move on, Dwight. Not only from the Rockets, but from opinions of proud know-nothing blowhards like Barkley and O'Neal and any other hot-take purveyors who listen to them. When Kenny Smith says you need to rebound more like Charles Barkley—a guy who averaged 11.7 per game to your 12.7—don't just nod and agree. You averaged 11.8 rebounds per game THIS SEASON. A big man can
<<UPDATE BELOW>> On Wednesday's The Situation Room, host Wolf Blitzer absurdly wondered if Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) pausing his State of the Union response for a drink of water would "break" his career. The CNN chyron flashed "Career-ender?"  "So can a drink of water make or break a political career?" Blitzer asked. "A U.S. Senator, possible presidential candidate. We're going to find out, whether he likes it or not."  [UPDATE:] CNN tells Politico, "We are joking. It was a tease."  However, despite CNN claiming the headline was a joke, host Wolf Blitzer kept his serious demeanor for the beginning of the next segment when he noted the "social media frenzy" over Rubio's "awkward pause." The headline was certainly a tease though, as correspondent Kate Bolduan focused her report on Rubio's Florida background.  "His big moment, however, overshadowed by an unscripted drink of water now deemed 'Watergate,'" Bolduan mentioned before noting Rubio's "charm" in his response to the incident.  Bolduan implied that the incident will fade quickly: "But maybe for the next couple of days, people will still be talking about his unscripted water break." And Blitzer acknowledged that "He's got a huge future ahead of him, he's a very impressive guy."  CNN still milked "Watergate" in the next segment, however, as Blitzer asked his guests if it was a "big deal" or a "little deal." He again implied that it wouldn't do any long-term damage, though. "But you agree, he's got a huge future ahead of him. The fact that he went for a sip of water, he wiped a little bit of sweat away from his forehead, that he was a little awkward," Blitzer said downplaying "Watergate."  A transcript of the segment, which aired on The Situation Room on February 13 at 4:32 p.m. EST, is as follows:  [4:28]  WOLF BLITZER: So can a drink of water make or break a political career? A U.S. Senator, possible presidential candidate. We're going to find out, whether he likes it or not.  [HEADLINE: "Career-Ender?"]   (...)  [4:32]   WOLF BLITZER: Marco Rubio made headlines for his Republican response to the President last night, but not necessarily for the reasons he may want. A social media frenzy started when the Senator made an awkward pause – there it is right there – to take a sip of water. Our Kate Bolduan earlier traveled to Miami to get the backstory on this rising GOP star.   (Video Clip)   Sen. MARCO RUBIO (R-Fla.): Good evening. I'm Marco Rubio.   KATE BOLDUAN: The 41-year-old senator, already labeled the Republican savior, was blunt in his official GOP response to the President's State of the Union address.   RUBIO: His solution to virtually every problem we face is for Washington to tax more, borrow more, and spend more.   BOLDUAN: His big moment, however, overshadowed by an unscripted drink of water now deemed "Watergate." Rubio took the moment now gone viral in stride.   RUBIO: I needed water. What am I going to do, you know? It happens. God has a funny way of reminding us that we are human.   BOLDUAN: That charm is one reason behind his rapid rise in the Republican party. To better understand his star power, we went to his roots, West Miami, Florida. His success may seem improbable.   RUBIO: My dad was a bartender. My mom was a cashier.   BOLDUAN: But it's no surprise to those closest to Marco Rubio.   Rep. ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN (R-Fla.): He was a superstar. He was a standout intern.   BOLDUAN: Rubio got his first taste of politics interning for Florida congresswoman Ileana Ros-Lehtinen.   ROS-LEHTINEN: I was a lot thinner and he had a lot more hair. But it's the same old Marco. Marco would do anything and anything that I asked interns to do, and willingly so, whether it was getting coffee or making copies, but mostly going with me to events. He was a real people person.   BOLDUAN: Soon after, at 26 years old, Rubio won his first election for the West Miami city commission, the community he grew up in and still lives with his wife. election and he lives with his wife and four
The Hawks did indeed leave starting point guard Jeff Teague behind after their Saturday night win over the Pistons. But don't expect that to happen again.  Photos circulated Saturday night that showed a confused Teague standing in an empty bus portal with a phone and Little Caesars pizza box in hand. He laughed off the moment with a crying Jordan meme on Instagram.  According to an @NBA_Reddit user, the Hawks have forgotten Jeff Teague at the Palace pic.twitter.com/JssBfFgCcx — Martinsek (@IAmMartinsek) March 27, 2016  Teague addressed the odd mishap for the first time on Monday, telling the Atlanta Journal-Constitution that he was taking too long talking to his sister after the game.  Via the AJC:  "I was out there talking to her too long," Teague told The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. The bus returned to pick up Teague and the team flew on to Chicago, where they will play the Bulls Monday. "They'll never forget me again," Teague said. "Hopefully, I'll get a better pizza."  Little Caesars, being the social-media aware #brand that it is, tweeted their own cartoon on the situation.  Good on Teague for being a great sport about it.  He wouldn't be the first person left behind by a team. Alabama's Lane Kiffin could certainly relate.
The League of Legends Championship Series slot formerly owned by Gravity Gaming has been purchased by former Boston Celtics and LA Lakers legend Rick Fox.  The three time NBA champion becomes the most decorated athlete to move into eSports ownership. The team will no longer be known as Gravity Gaming and instead will be rebranded as "Echo Fox" for the upcoming season and beyond.  Fox, who now plies his trade as an actor, is no stranger to gaming, having previously partnered with the official gaming world record authority Twin Galaxies. He even donated his three NBA Championship Rings to the campaign #Right2Game which supports the elevation of video game players throughout the world. Fox has been following the competitive gaming scene for some time and now feels it is right to take the plunge into ownership.  In a formal press release, Fox said: "As a professional athlete, businessman and proud member of the gaming community, I see the way that the eSports world is growing and I know we are on the verge of something massive. The opportunity to parlay my experience in sports, entertainment and gaming into a leadership role with Echo Fox is exciting and humbling. This decision is equal parts business and personal for me."  "The desire, focus, dedication and work ethic that I have seen from athletes in the eSports space reminds me of the competition I felt as I pursued a career in basketball," Fox added. "My passion was supported and embraced by society and, as owner of Echo Fox, I plan to be an advocate for our athletes in the same way."  This purchase represents the latest in a string of high profile acquisitions in eSports, particularly in the LCS. Team Dignitas recently announced selling their spot for in excess of $1 million to Follow Esports, now rebranded as Splyce. The Immortals Franchise is owned by a group of investors that includes Peter Levin, the president of Lionsgate Interactive Venture and Games, Steve Kaplan, a co-owner of the basketball franchise Memphis Grizzlies, and the business arm of the band Linkin Park. An investment group including co-owners from the Sacramento Kings franchise also recently purchased an LCS team, now called NRG Esports.
"In order to protect Americans, the United States must ensure that those admitted to this country do not bear hostile attitudes toward it and its founding principles." ∼ Executive order: Protecting the Nation from Foreign Terrorist Entry into the United States  It can be expected that Catholic bishops will respond with dismay to President Trump's order banning immigration from seven Muslim nations. When Trump first proposed banning Muslims from entering the U.S., Archbishop Joseph Kurtz, the president of the USCCB issued a statement repudiating "the hatred and suspicion that leads to policies of discrimination." At about the same time, Archbishop William Lori of Baltimore said Catholics could "not possibly countenance" restricting entry to the U.S. solely on the basis of religious affiliation. It can also be expected that bishops will employ an argument they have long used against opponents of Muslim immigration—namely, that Catholic immigrants were once treated with similar suspicion.  Catholics and non-Catholics alike now laugh at the anti-Catholic prejudice of the Know-Nothings (aka The American Party) and other groups who were opposed to immigration from Catholic countries in Europe. The anti-Catholics based their objection on the belief that Catholics owed allegiance to a foreign power (the Vatican), and thus, Catholics could never be truly loyal to America and its Constitution. More than that, there were dark rumors about a papist plot to take over America, and about an undersea tunnel that connected the Vatican to New York. This view—that Catholics could never assimilate to America's democratic culture—persisted in some quarters up until the election of John F. Kennedy.  The fact that some Americans once mistakenly considered Catholicism a menace is now used as an argument against critics of Muslim immigration. Just as the Know-Nothings of days gone by were wrong about Catholicism, so also will today's "Know-Nothings" be proven wrong about Islam. Or, so it is claimed. The open-borders advocates within the Church assure us that Islam will turn out to be as Americans as apple pie: give Islam a chance, and you will discover that the local Iman is just Bing Crosby's Father O'Malley with a beard—a mellow fellow whose biggest concern is to pay off the mortgage on the mosque.  But what if all the things that were once falsely charged against Catholicism are actually true of Islam? The nineteenth century anti-Catholics mistakenly thought that Catholicism was a theocracy, but Islam really is a theocracy. The anti-Catholics wrongly questioned the loyalty of American Catholics, but numerous polls show that a majority of Muslims consider their primary allegiance to be to the ummah (the worldwide community of Muslim believers), and not to whatever nation they happen to reside in. A Pew Research survey of Muslim-Americans under thirty revealed that sixty percent of them felt more loyalty to Islam than to America. The Know-Nothings worried needlessly that Catholics would be subject to foreign influence, but when you consider that 85 percent of fulltime, paid imams in the U.S. are foreign born, then foreign influence on American Muslims does seem a legitimate concern.  What about the anti-Catholic fear that Catholics would be bound by Canon Law not Constitutional Law? There was, of course, little need for worry. The scope of Cannon Law is largely restricted to internal Church affairs, and most Catholics have only the vaguest acquaintance with its requirements. On the other hand, sharia law governs almost every aspect of daily life for Muslims. Moreover, many tenets of sharia law directly contradict the Constitution and the Bill of Rights. Sharia law permits cruel and unusual punishments; the open-ended sharia blasphemy laws makes free speech highly problematic; and the apostasy and dhimmitude laws more or less cancel out religious freedom.  How seriously is sharia regarded in Muslim lands? In many Muslim nations sharia law (or Islamic law) is the law of the land. For example, it is written into the constitutions of Saudi Arabia, Egypt, ­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­and Iraq. The Cairo Declaration on Human Rights in Islam which is the Islamic response to the United Nation's Universal Declaration of Human Rights was ratified by all 57 member nations of the Organization of the Islamic Conference. Article 24 of the Declaration states "All the rights and freedoms stipulated in this Declaration are subject to the Islamic Sharia." Article 25 states "The Islamic Sharia is the only source of reference for the explanation or clarification of any of the articles of this Declaration." All of which sounds a bit like the fine print in a warranty which tells you that your product is completely covered for 10 years except for labor and all the working parts.  But how about Muslims in America? You may think that American Muslims pay no attention to the thousand-year-old requirements of sharia law, but polls show otherwise. A nationwide survey conducted by The Polling Company for the Center for Security Policy reveals that 51 percent of Muslims agreed that "Muslims
10:55 p.m. update: One person is dead and another was injured after a hit-and-run wreck in North Austin on Sunday night, according to police.  The crash was reported at the North Austin Event Center at 10601 North Lamar Boulevard near Braker Lane about 10:15 p.m. Two pedestrians were hit by a dark-colored SUV in the parking lot of the event center, according to police. One person was pronounced dead at the scene and another was taken to University Medical Center Brackenridge with injuries that were considered life-threatening, according to Austin-Travis County EMS.  Police said that the vehicle left the scene and that they were still looking for it. They did not have a detailed description of the vehicle.  Earlier: One person has been killed and another hospitalized with life-threatening injuries following a wreck involving at least one pedestrian in North Austin, according to Austin-Travis County EMS.  The incident took place in the 10600 block of North Lamar Boulevard, just south of Braker Lane.
'Cry rape' woman, 21, jailed for two years for false claims against four men  Serial liar: Emma Blunden was starting a two-year prison sentence today after she falsely accused four men of raping her in two separate attacks  A woman was jailed for two years today after being exposed as a serial liar who repeatedly made up stories that she had been raped.  Emma Blunden, 21, from Reading, Berkshire, was sentenced at Reading Crown Court after been convicted of two counts of perverting the course of justice at the same court in December.  The court heard that a total of four men were arrested over both allegations, but all were freed without charge.  Blunden's lies began on July 26, 2008, when she reported to police that she had been raped by James Mabey, 26, in a hostel where she was living in Newbury.  Police then arrested Mr Mabey who was questioned for 17 hours before police realised he was innocent and released him.  The judge was also told about how Blunden boasted about having sex with Mr Mabey and sent him a text message to apologise for getting him arrested.  She was then arrested herself and interviewed about her false allegations but released so that police could investigate further.  While out on bail she went to a party and flirted with a man before letting three men have sex with her in a communal bathroom, one after another.  She then left the party and dialled 999 to say that her train fare money had been stolen before saying she had been gang raped by three men - Shane Roberts, 23, Craig Pilime and Colin McDonagh, both 21.   They were all taken in to custody and were needlessly questioned for up to 13 hours each, before they were released without charge.  Sentencing her Judge John Reddihough said: 'False allegations of rape were made which saw a number of men kept in custody for many hours. The first incident was a misguided attempt to win back a former boyfriend.  'The second saw three men spend from 11 and a half to 13 hours in custody over allegations made against them. Perhaps you were ashamed of your own sexual conduct to these men.  'I take into account no previous convictions, your age, maturity and the pre-sentence report but on two occasions you made false allegations and only a custodial sentence is appropriate in your case.'  Blunden was handed two consecutive 12 month prison sentences for perverting the course of justice and was told she would face a minimum of one year in prison.  Detective Sergeant Elton Evans, from Thames Valley Police, said: 'As a result of Blunden's allegations the men were arrested and had to go through some intimate forensic checks.  'We take every single report of rape very seriously. Each report is dealt with by detectives and other specialist officers who conduct a full investigation at great public expense.  'The investigation of any false or malicious allegation diverts valuable resources away from genuine crimes with genuine victims.  'We will take action against anyone who reports a false crime and wastes police time.'  Defending Blunden Nicholas Doherty said that she needed help to 'amend her personality defects of depression and insecurities.'
There are an estimated 10 million pigs in North Carolina's pig farming industry. Together, they produce waste equivalent to 100 million humans. Worse, septic infrastructure doesn't exist at pig factories to properly handle the massive amounts of pig waste produced daily.  In October 2016, the New York Times' editorial board published an op-ed that described the roughly 4,000 "waste lagoons" of pink sludge scattered across eastern North Carolina. The bacteria from these lagoons have been known to pollute groundwater and surface water, permeating nearby communities with noxious fumes. The board writes, "People living near these lagoons are at increased risk of asthma, diarrhea, eye irritation, depression and other health problems." A 2016 report conducted by Julia Kravchenko from the Duke University School of Medicine found links between exposure to waste from hog farms and acute blood pressure increase, impaired neurobehavioral and pulmonary function. Her report also discovered carcinogenic effects induced by chemicals from hog farming waste.  "Hog farming is an unnecessary evil that is destroying formerly beautiful North Carolina from the inside out, just as it does to the people who eat the pigs flesh and live by the farms," Kip Andersen, director of the documentary Cowspiracy, told the Observer, referring to waste from the farms and the carcinogenic properties associated with foods like bacon. In his latest documentary, What the Health, Andersen interviews several locals in Duplin County, North Carolina, where many of these waste lagoons reside, and hogs outnumber residents 40 to one. "My dad lives there, and I just can't imagine anyone knowingly partaking in this horrific industry in anyway."  In What the Health, Andersen speaks to Duplin County resident Rene Miller. She says, "My sister, she has asthma. Her brother (she points to a baby she's holding), he has asthma. He's three, and we don't know yet what she has. I have asthma… I have sarcoidosis from bacteria. And I have a pacemaker, which is sick sinus syndrome. Mostly everybody in this neighborhood got asthma or even cancer. My neighbor there died from cancer probably just last year. My nephew down the street, he's got cancer. He's in terminal cancer stage four. Not a smoker, not a drinker. And it's not in his lungs. It's in his lymph nodes." She continues, "If you live here and saw what they do, you will eat no pork. We don't eat bacon because I know what it comes from. When they die, they go into a box, and they decompose because they swell from, especially from the heat. A truck comes and picks them up, takes them to the processing plant in Roseville, grounds them up into feed, and feeds them back to the hogs."  Twenty-five percent of Duplin County residents are black, and over 20 percent are Hispanic. An analysis conducted by WaterKeeper Alliance found that out of 2,246 pig concentrated animal feeding operations in the state, only 12 have been required to obtain permits under the Clean Water Act. The rest operate under lax state permit guidelines. A 2014 study conducted by University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill found that black people are 1.54 times more likely to reside near these hog operations in North Carolina than white people, Hispanics are 1.39 times more likely, and Native Americans are 2.18 times more likely.  A class action lawsuit was recently filed by nearly 500 residents, mostly members of affected African American communities in eastern North Carolina, against Murphy-Brown, North Carolina's largest hog producer, for disposing pig waste by spraying it untreated into fields near those communities. The lawsuit is making its way to federal court at the same time North Carolina's state legislature has been pushing through a bill to further ease regulations on hog operations. "I'm not surprised there's been a lawsuit," said Duke University Law Professor Ryke Longest. "I'm surprised it took so long for one to be filed."
BRECKENRIDGE — Colorado tourism officials are not actively going to promote the state's legal marijuana industry any time soon, but they are ramping up educational and informational efforts around the issue, the state's tourism director said Friday.  In an interview following her keynote speech here at the Colorado Governor's Tourism Conference, Cathy Ritter, director of the Colorado Tourism Office, said Colorado.com may soon have information available conveying the legalities of the state's marijuana laws.  "I do believe we need to make it clear to our travelers what to expect when they come to a state where marijuana is legal," she said. "I've had some hoteliers believe that their front desk clerks are paying the price because we do not share information with travelers about that.  "Because a lot of people, when they come to the state, are unaware that they can't smoke marijuana publicly; and so it's really more of an education program that's needed."  The educational information about Colorado's legal marijuana regulations eventually would be searchable on the state's tourism website, she said, adding that "we would never have a marijuana tab" on the front page of the website. A timeline for the inclusion of the marijuana-related information has yet to be finalized, she said.  Ritter said she hopes to help clear up any misinformation for visitors who have an interest in the legal marijuana industry as well as those who may be deterred from traveling to Colorado because of their perceptions.  "It's just good practice to make certain visitors have a good understanding, a good perception on what to expect when they come to visit any destination," she said.  During her keynote speech on the state of Colorado's tourism industry — which totaled $19.1 billion in 2015, up 3 percent from the year before — Ritter did not mention the marijuana industry.  "We're not in a position to promote marijuana because it would be a violation of federal law," she said in the interview following the speech. "Even if we could promote marijuana, we wouldn't, because it's not a major driver for travelers."  The latest research from the state showed that while legal marijuana played a role in 23 percent of visitors' trips to Colorado, about 4 percent of adult travelers came to the state because of legal weed and to purchase cannabis products.  To that end, one of the breakout sessions following Ritter's morning keynote speech was about "The Marijuana Message."  Officials from the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment as well as Strategic Marketing & Research Insights, the firm hired by the state to conduct the travel survey, addressed a crowd of around 100 tourism industry members on topics such as tourism data, health concerns and regulations.  Adults exposed to the state's "Good to Know" campaign were 2.5 times as likely to understand Colorado laws than those who were not exposed to the campaign, said Ali Maffey, retail marijuana education manager for the state's health department.  "It's been effective within the state, with residents," she said. "It's really hard to reach tourists in the three days they're here."  Maffey's department has taken actions such as online search and retargeting — if people are searching for marijuana with out-of-state IP addresses, they'll be served with ads about the state's Good to Know campaign. Additional actions include radio spots within the state as well as brochures available at tourism offices.  "If you are here and choose to use, we want to make sure people have information about the educated use," she said.
Hackers infiltrated the Pentagon food court's computer system, compromising the bank data of an unknown number of employees.  Lt. Col. Tom Crosson, a Defense Department spokesman, said on Tuesday that employees were notified that hackers may have stolen bank account information from people who paid for concessions at the Pentagon with a credit or debit card.  "Within the past week, the Pentagon Force Protection Agency has received numerous reports of fraudulent use of credit cards belonging to Pentagon personnel. These individuals had fraudulent charges to their account soon after they had legitimate transactions at the Pentagon," according to a copy of the notice to employees obtained by the Washington Examiner.  Crosson was unable to say how many people have been affected or over what time period, saying the Pentagon Force Protection Agency is investigating.
An ultrasound technician had just told Rachel Tittle that she was carrying a baby girl when things went terribly wrong.  She was 20 weeks pregnant at the time and couldn't wait to become a mother. That's when a doctor walked into her examination room and delivered the news that still haunts her six years later.  "They told me my baby's abdomen was full of fluid — and if nothing changed very soon, it was going to stop her heart," Tittle told The Washington Post, recalling the 2011 incident. "It was a horrible, horrible experience."  After a series of tests, doctors told Tittle and her husband that their unborn child had contracted congenital Cytomegalovirus Infection (CMV), a common virus with few symptoms that can be passed from a mother to her developing fetus. The virus leaves some fetuses unharmed, but kills others and can result in permanent hearing loss and mental impairment for children who survive.  Rachel Tittle, 37, testified before the Texas Senate Committee on State Affairs last month about S.B. 25. Tittle believes the proposal encourages doctors to lie to their patients. (Courtesy of Rachel Tittle)  By the time doctors decided to try an experimental procedure on the baby to save her life, it was too late.  "There was too much damage" Tittle said. "They couldn't find a heartbeat because she had died."  Tittle believes that if she had discovered her child's illness earlier in her pregnancy, the baby might have been saved. She doesn't fault doctors for failing to notice the infection in time. But she does fear that a new bill introduced in the Texas Senate could lead to more unborn babies like her own dying unnecessarily.  Tittle told lawmakers her story when she testified recently before the Texas Senate Committee on State Affairs against Texas Senate Bill 25. Also known as the "wrongful birth" bill, S.B. 25 would prevent parents from suing doctors if their child is born with a disability.  Tittle says her story illustrates the importance of monitoring pregnancies carefully for signs of problems. But it has gotten tangled up in the debate over abortion.  ['The only reason I am alive is the fact that the abortionist had not yet arrived at work']  The sponsors of the "wrongful birth" bill say such prenatal tests, which may lead women to choose abortion, can be used in lawsuits against doctors who see fetal defects and do not recommend abortion.  The bill's author, state Sen. Brandon Creighton (R), said he introduced the legislation because he considers it "unacceptable that doctors can be penalized for embracing the sanctity of life" in Texas and noted that — as a father of two — he believes that "every child is precious."  In announcing the proposed legislation in November, Creighton's office said that the state senator from Conroe, near Houston, "took a stand for the unborn with a bill intended to protect doctors from legal pressure to recommend abortion. Based on legal precedent, doctors can be assigned liability for children born with abnormalities if they identified those abnormalities in utero and failed to advocate for termination, resulting in what's termed a 'wrongful birth.'"  The bill's opponents say S.B. 25 would create an incentive for antiabortion doctors to avoid conducting prenatal tests, of fully informing pregnant women of the test results — or even to lie to patients who might seek an abortion after learning their fetus has abnormalities.  Tittle, who says she isn't affiliated with either side of the abortion debate, is quick to point out that she believes her doctor acted in good faith before her unborn child died — but she's not convinced other doctors will do the same.  She says she worries that lawmakers are so intent on stopping abortions that they're willing to provide legal cover for religious doctors who want to steer pregnant women away from abortion at all costs.  Along the way, she said, families who want to fight for their fetus's health may lose the chance to do so.  "I would've done anything to save my child and that would be a huge decision for a doctor to take away from me," she added.  Creighton, the bill's author, said in an email to The Washington Post that "expectant parents should not be worried. This legislation does not impact their ability for recourse under the Texas Civil Practice & Remedies Code, which allows for lawsuits claiming fraud and gross negligence."  "Physicians who act unethically, or knowingly withholding information from their patients, can be sued," he added.  ['Jane Roe' made abortion legal. Then a minister made her rethink.]  In Texas, "wrongful birth" lawsuits give parents of children with severe disabilities the ability to take legal action against their doctor if they believe they weren't adequately informed about their child's disability before their birth. Creighton's bill would terminate wrongful birth lawsuits as a cause of action in
Get ready to take a seat at The Pie Hole because "Pushing Daisies" could be returning ... as a musical.  Bryan Fuller, the creator of the beloved detective series, mentioned that he met with Barry Sonnenfeld (who won an Emmy for directing a "Pushing Daisies" episode) about financing a film version of the show. Fuller also revealed that he had spoken with Kristin Chenoweth about developing the series as a stage musical.  According to Broadway World, Fuller said, "We're working on something that is definitely a 'Pushing Daisies' revival, and the idea would be to have as many cast as we can to participate in it." Whether the reunion is on the screen or stage remains to be seen, but either way this is a great news for fans of the series which sadly only ran for two seasons.  If you have any doubts about how "Pushing Daisies" could work as a musical, check out the wonderful video below featuring the musical numbers that would randomly appear throughout the series.
Mentioned-only location Vault 70 Site part of Utah People factions Mormons  Fallout Bible and is not considered canon. The following is based on theand is not considered canon.  Vault 70 was a Vault-Tec vault located in Salt Lake City, Utah.  Contents show]  Background Edit  As part of the vault experiment, all jumpsuit extruders in this vault failed after 6 months. The eventual total lack of clothing combined with Mormon religious sensibilities resulted in the single largest block of social data collected during the vault program.[1]  Van Buren and has not been confirmed by The following is based onand has not been confirmed by canon sources.  In 2062, many Mormon congregations came together to purchase places in Vault 70. The vault was opened in 2190, and its inhabitants founded the town of New Jerusalem.[2]  Van Buren. End of information based on  Notes Edit  Vault 70 was given three GECKs. It is unknown whether or not this was intended, as most vaults were supplied with two.  Appearances Edit  Vault 70 was first mentioned in the Fallout Bible and was going to be mentioned in Van Buren, the canceled Fallout 3 project by Black Isle Studios.
The 17th annual Southeast MedWAR Race will beheld on  Saturday April 14, 2018 at Fort Gordon, GA.  Race Registration will open February 1 thourgh active.com!  Race Registration will be $280, but we will have $20 off Early-bird special and a $20 extra fee for late registraion after March 15 if there are any spots left.  March 15 update: We have a few spots left! Sign-up soon!  Register early as this race often sells out!  Volunteer Sign-up will be open February 1. If you would like to volunteer, please contact us. Volunteers will be selected and given a password to register on active.com.  Find us on Facebook to connect with us and other racers!  Feel free to post comments and questions.  Also, you can use the event to find teammates!!   Thanks for your interest. We hope to see you in April!   A BIG THANKS to all our volunteers, spectators, sponsors, and the press who support us. We can't do it without our volunteers and supporters!  See you next year!  -------------------------------------------------------  Download a Quicktime Slideshow (6.3 MB - Right click to save to disk) to show your friends and convince them to be your teammates.  Southeast MedWAR was the original MedWAR Race. Complete with simulated helicopter crashes, alligator-filed swamps, and ever-unique scenarios, it has continued to challenge competitors for over a decade. You never know what may be around the next turn.
Stephanie Gilmore wins sixth world surfing title as Carissa Moore wins Maui Pro from Tyler Wright  Updated  Australia's Stephanie Gilmore has won a sixth world surfing title in a dramatic climax to the 2014 women's tour in Hawaii.  Gilmore of Tweed Heads opened the door for compatriots Sally Fitzgibbons and Tyler Wright when she lost the quarter-final of the Maui Pro to American Courtney Conlogue this morning.  Fitzgibbons was eliminated in the following heat missing her chance to overtake rankings leader Gilmore.  Tyler won her quarter-final over Lakey Peterson and then her semi-final over South African Bianca Buitendag.  Tyler could snatch the world title from Gilmore by beating former world champion Carissa Moore in the final and then beating Gilmore in a surf-off for the final.  But overcoming Hawaiian Moore in the final proved too tough a hurdle for Tyler.  Moore won the final 18.23 to 14.03 handing a sixth world title to Gilmore.  Tyler finished runner-up for the year and Moore beat Fitzgibbons to third place.  Gilmore said it was an incredibly nervous situation watching from the sidelines as her world title went on the line.  "That was the craziest couple of hours," Gilmore said.  "I was so nervous just waiting and I was convinced Tyler would force it into a surf-off."  "I owe Carissa a drink tonight, that's for sure ... this is so unreal."  Gilmore one title behind Layne Beachley's record of seven  Gilmore said this year's title race, culminating in the three-way all-Australian battle in Hawaii, had been one of her toughest in eight years on tour.  "It's an incredible feeling of relief and elation," Gilmore told ABC radio.  "I didn't count Tyler or Sally out until that very moment when I knew that they were out of the race."  Wright, pipped to last year's title by Moore, was philosophical after her near miss.  "I live a pretty good life and I have fantastic people around me, so there's not a lot to get kind of bummed out about," Wright said.  "Some people call it a twisted view on what I do but it's just who I am. I don't get so caught up in the winning and losing side of life but more in the actual journey itself."  Gilmore adds the 2014 world crown to the titles she won in 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010 and 2012.  The 26-year-old is only one world title behind Layne Beachley's record haul of seven.  "It's happened so quickly, I can't believe it's six already," Gilmore said.  "But it is going to get harder and harder every year."  ABC/AAP  Topics: surfing, sport, united-states, tweed-heads-2485, nsw, australia, coolangatta-4225, lismore-2480, qld  First posted
Image copyright Reuters Image caption Nawaz Sharif has survived one court ruling but now faces a fresh investigation  The leak of 11 million documents held by the Panama-based law firm Mossack Fonseca identified links between many political and business leaders around the world and offshore companies and accounts. Among them was the Pakistani prime minister's family.  The Pakistani Supreme Court has now ordered an investigation into their affairs by a joint team of civil and military investigation agencies, as the BBC's M Ilyas Khan explains.  What did the Panama Papers reveal?  The leaks in April 2016 revealed that three of Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif's children owned offshore companies and assets not shown on his family's wealth statement.  The companies identified so far include three British Virgin Islands-based companies Nescoll Ltd, Nielsen Enterprises Ltd and Hangon Property Holdings Ltd, incorporated in 1993, 1994 and 2007 respectively.  These companies have been used to channel funds to acquire foreign assets, including some apartments along Park Lane in London's Mayfair area.  The insinuation that the companies were meant to hide or launder ill-gotten wealth or to avoid taxes called his credentials into question.  Image copyright AFP Image caption The Panama revelations led to protests around the world - and, here in Iceland, the resignation of the prime minister  What does Mr Sharif say?  Mr Sharif and his family have denied wrongdoing. In November, they told the Supreme Court that their London property was bought through investments in companies owned by the Qatari ruling family.  The prime minister has called the leaks the work of people "targeting me and my family for their political aims". In an address to the nation on 5 April 2016, he said those "who use ill-gotten wealth don't keep assets in their own names".  Initially, however, the leaks appeared to trigger panic in the top circles of the ruling PML-N party. The pressure was believed to be the reason behind Mr Sharif's unscheduled departure for London on 13 April 2016 to keep a rare appointment with his doctors.  This week, the sudden emergence of billboards supporting the prime minister and his government in parts of Punjab and Sindh provinces was seen by many as an attempt to whip up public support in case of an adverse ruling by the Supreme Court.  The prime minister has not yet commented on the Supreme Court's decision, but his top aides have called it a victory for the ruling party, which had proposed a judiciary-led investigation at the start.  Image copyright Reuters Image caption Supporters of Nawaz Sharif welcomed the court's decision not to remove him from office  How did the Supreme Court ruling come about?  The ruling came at the end of a year-long process in which the court examined thousands of pages of evidence and heard lengthy arguments by lawyers from both sides.  The Panama Papers leaks came at a time when Mr Sharif's government was still recovering from the 2014 siege of Islamabad by opposition politician Imran Khan which kept the federal capital paralysed for four months.  Back then it was believed that some elements in the security establishment were backing the protests to prevent Mr Sharif from taking domestic and foreign policy initiatives independently of the military.  With the Panama leaks hitting the headlines, the government again come under pressure from Mr Khan and smaller groups who demanded his resignation and threatened another lockdown of Islamabad.  They filed petitions at the Supreme Court for the prime minister to be disqualified.  After initially rejecting the petitions on the grounds that they were based more on hearsay than facts, the Supreme Court constituted a five-member bench in October 2016 to start hearings in the case.  Image copyright AP Image caption Opposition politician Imran Khan wants Mr Sharif to resign  What did the Supreme Court say and what happens next?  In its ruling the court stopped short of removing Mr Sharif from public office. Instead, it has ordered investigators drawn from civilian investigation agencies and military intelligence services to examine the money trail, look at records where available and obtain testimony from key players.  The team - in front of whom the prime minister and his children have been ordered to appear - will submit its report to the court in two months' time.  Critics believe two months is too short for the team to conduct an investigation that takes in Pakistan, the UAE, Qatar and the UK, not to mention Panama. They also point out that two judges out of five, including the chief justice of Pakistan, suggested that the prime minister be disqualified.  Many opposition leaders, including former President Asif Zardari and Imran Khan, have suggested the prime minister should resign as a fair investigation is not possible if he remains in power.  Has the episode weakened Mr Sharif?  Speculation that a ruling in the case could put Mr Sharif in immediate trouble and bring forward elections due in 2018 has eased for now.  But the verdict has not eased the air of acrimony that has marred Pakistani politics since 2014.  The fact
(BERLIN) - German Chancellor Angela Merkel said Thursday that the EU would target more figures with travel bans and asset freezes over the Ukraine crisis, and also warned of economic sanctions.  Merkel told parliament that Russia's absorption of Ukraine's Crimea region, which has been condemned as a violation of international law, demanded a "resolute and united" response by Europe and its partners.  "At the European Council beginning today, the heads of state and government of the European Union will decide further phase-two sanctions that we agreed two weeks ago," Merkel said ahead of the two-day summit in Brussels.  Among them would be "an extension of the list of responsible people against whom travel restrictions and account freezes are in effect," she said.  At a crisis summit on March 6, EU leaders agreed a three-step scenario against President Vladimir Putin that began with the suspension of talks on easing visas into Europe for Russian travellers.  This week, the EU ratcheted up its response by slapping an asset freeze and travel ban on 21 Russians and Ukrainians deemed to be behind the annexation of Crimea, including three top military brass.  Merkel also warned Moscow of possible economic sanctions if the crisis escalates.  "Furthermore the EU Council today and tomorrow will make clear that we are ready at any time to apply third-phase measures in the event of a further worsening of the situation.  "And it will, without doubt, be a question of economic sanctions," she said.  Turning to Russia's position in the G8, Merkel said "as long as there aren't the political conditions for such an important format as the G8 at the moment, there can no longer be a G8, neither a summit nor the format as such".  Later Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier said that Merkel had been referring to preparations for the June G8 summit in the Russian Olympic resort of Sochi having been put on hold.  "The chancellor alluded to the fact today that the G8 preparations are, in effect, suspended," he said at a news conference with his Romanian counterpart Titus Corlatean in Berlin.  "Suspended however doesn't mean that the G8 format is cancelled," he said, adding that this will have to be discussed by its members, as such a step would reverse the developments of "years and decades".  Merkel earlier also said that Berlin would decide whether scheduled German-Russian government consultations go ahead at the end of April or not, and in what form.  French President Francois Hollande has announced the cancellation of an EU-Russia summit planned for June.
Here we go again! Michele Bachmann, realizing that the world once again had forgotten that she still holds a political office, let alone cared about what she had to say, decided to stir the pot a bit. On Tuesday, in an interview with CNN's Crossfire host Van Jones, Bachmann called the thousand of Central American refugee children "invaders" and linked them to rapists and…car crashes.  "Foreign nationals that have come into the United States are between 300- to 500,000," she said. "My heart is broken for a female college student in Minnesota who was raped, murdered and mutilated by a foreign national who came into our country. We had a school bus full of kids in Minnesota. Four children were killed on that school bus because an illegal alien driving a van went into that school bus." "My tears are crying for the family members who lost four little children on a school bus in Minnesota," Bachmann continued, overtalking Jones as he objected to her attempt to link these children to incidents from years before they stepped foot in our country.  "There are lines that can't be crossed here," Jones responded. "I'm sorry, congresswoman. Are you gonna scapegoat children for the crime of this despicable person?"  Bachmann did not cite sources, so it is unclear which of America's many rape cases she was referencing, but she was likely blaming these children–most of whom are not old enough to drive–for a 2008 bus crash that tragically took the lives of Hunter and Jesse Javens, Emilee Olson, and Reed Stevens, the kids she claims her heart is with, but can not name.  "We should stand with those children, but we should not scapegoat every one of these kids for that despicable crime," he said. "You know better as a congressperson than to lay at the feet of these children the acts of a despicable criminal."  "Don't scapegoat the American people," Bachmann responded. "Van, don't scapegoat the American people right now who are losing jobs."  Watch Bachmann compare children to rapists, below:  h/t: RawStory
PARTICIPANT REQUIREMENTS  Must be able to complete the 10K in 1:25 or less.  All participants (parent/guardian if minor) must sign a Hartford Marathon Foundation waiver form and show a Photo ID to pick up race packet.
A scientist in the United Kingdom has found that compounds derived from marijuana can kill cancerous cells found in people with leukemia, a form of cancer that is expected to cause an estimated 24,000 deaths in the United States this year.  "Cannabinoids have a complex action; it hits a number of important processes that cancers need to survive," study author Dr. Wai Liu, an oncologist at St. George's University of London, told The Huffington Post. "For that reason, it has really good potential over other drugs that only have one function. I am impressed by its activity profile, and feel it has a great future, especially if used with standard chemotherapies."  Liu's study was recently published in the journal Anticancer Research. It was supported by funding from GW Pharmaceuticals, which already makes a cannabis-derived drug used to treat spasticity caused by multiple sclerosis.  The study looked at the effects of six different non-psychoactive cannabinoids -- compounds derived from marijuana that do not cause the "high" associated with its THC ingredient -- when applied alone, and in combination, to leukemia cells. Cannabinoids displayed a "diverse range of therapeutic qualities" that "target and switch off" pathways that allow cancers to grow, Liu told U.S. News & World Report.  Liu stressed to HuffPost that his research was built around the testing of the six purified cannabinoid forms -- not traditional cannabis oil, which Liu described as "crude" in comparison and generally containing 80-100 different cannabinoids. "We do not really know which are the ones that will be anticancer and those that may be harmful," Liu said.  During the study, Liu and his team grew leukemia cells in a lab and cultured them with increasing doses of the six pure cannabinoids, both individually and in combination with each other. His study says the six cannabinoids were CBD (Cannabidiol), CBDA (Cannabidiolic acid), CBG (Cannbigerol), CBGA (Cannabigerolic acid), CBGV (Cannabigevarin) and CBGVA (Cannabigevaric acid). Liu and his team then assessed the viability of the leukemia cells and determined whether or not the cannabinoids destroyed the cells or stopped them from growing.  Although promising, Liu also said that it remains unclear if the cannabinoid treatment would work on the 200-plus existing types of cancer.  "Cancer is an umbrella term for a range of diseases that fundamentally differ in their cellular makeup, [and] which occur as a result of disturbances to growth controls," Liu said. "Chemotherapy works by disrupting these dysfunctional growth signals. Therefore, any cancers that have these profiles should respond to the chemotherapy. It just so happens that a number of cannabinoids can target these very same mechanisms that make cancer what it is, and so any cancer that exhibits these faults should respond well to cannabinoids. The flip side is, of course, that other cancers may not have these same genetic faults and so cannabinoids may not work as well."  According to the Centers for Disease Control, 7.6 million people die from various forms of cancer each year worldwide.  When asked if smoking marijuana has the same or similar effects as ingesting the pure cannabinoid compounds he studied, Liu said he thinks it's unlikely.  "Smoking cannabis introduces a number of potential problems," Liu said. "First, the complex makeup of cannabis that contains about 80 bioactive substances means that the desired anticancer effect may be lost because these compounds may interfere with each other. Second, we see that delivering the drug either by injection or by a tablet would ensure the most effective doses are given. Smoking would be variable, and indeed the heat of the burning may actually destroy the useful nature of the compounds."  In 2012, researchers at the California Pacific Medical Center in San Francisco found that CBD (cannbidiol), a non-toxic, non-psychoactive chemical compound found in the cannabis plant, could stop metastasis in many kinds of aggressive cancer.  The National Cancer Institute has also funded some research into cannabis and cancer, including a 2012 study that looked at the effects cannabis compounds have on slowing the progression of breast cancer, spokesman Michael Miller told U.S. News and World Report. However NCI has not funded research on the effects of cannabinoids on leukemia.  Liu stressed that much work is still needed, and said that finding support for marijuana-derived medicines can be polarizing.  "Although there is much promise, I struggle to find enough support to drive this work on," Liu said. "The mention of cannabinoids can polarize the public, who understandably link cannabis smoking with cannabis-derived drugs."
Follow us on Twitter at  @HoustonBias  and  @AstrosBias      The Astros have signed Chad Qualls, the right handed reliever whom was a key cog in the bullpen during the glory days. The two year deal is worth $6 million with possible incentives, and a club option in 2016 to the tune of $3.5 million. The 35 year old Astros product turned journey man, whom has thrown for eight different clubs, will return home and likely slot into a setup role. Quallsy is coming off a huge age 34 season with the Marlins boasting a WAR of 1.8, and will instantly become the best arm out of the 'pen. The big right hander is a strict sinker ball, slider type, and those two offerings have served him well with mostly positive values over the years. Last year Chad posted the highest average velocity of his career with his sinker at 93.9 MPH, so it would appear he has found a second wind with no sign of regression. Upon leaving Houston for Arizaona with Chris Burke via the Jose Valverde trade, Chad saw stints closing in 2009 and 2010, but likely will not return to the role upon his homecoming. Qualls figures to shoulder a heavy workload, but the durable reliever should have no trouble doing so as he hasn't seen less than 50 innings of work in any campaign but his rookie one. This move addresses by far the biggest hole in the roster, and will not be the last move to bolster the bullpen. The last week has been very fruitful for Jeff Luhnow & Co. and the big league club has improved leaps and bounds. It's nice to have a member of the 2004-2005 teams back in Houston, and hopefully Qualls can experience winning baseball in an Astros uniform yet again. Below are a look at Qualls' numbers via baseball-reference.com and a video of the fist pump heard round the world.
Infernal Naval Commander, Legend Shop Vendor Greetings! I seek adventurers ready to become Legends, Lore's most legendary Heroes! Upgrade your account to become a Legend and obtain exclusive gear. If you upgrade in October 2018, you'll unlock the Dark Guardian of Time or Bright Guardian of Time gear!  Infernal Naval Commander, Legend Shop Vendor Greetings! I seek adventurers ready to become Legends, Lore's most legendary Heroes! Upgrade your account to become a Legend and obtain exclusive gear. If you upgrade in September 2018, you'll unlock the Infernal Naval Commander or Infernal Pirate Captain gear!  Charged Ninja, Legend Shop Vendor Greetings! I seek adventurers ready to become members, Lore's most legendary Heroes! Upgrade your account to become a Legend or purchase AdventureCoins to obtain exclusive gear. If you upgrade in June 2018, you'll unlock the Charged Ninja or Dark Shogun gear!  Golden Monster Lord, Legend Shop Vendor Greetings! I seek adventurers ready to become members, Lore's most legendary Heroes! Upgrade your account to become a Legend or purchase AdventureCoins to obtain exclusive gear. If you upgrade in June 2018, you'll unlock the Monster Lord gear!  ShadowScythe Warrior, Legend Shop Vendor Greetings! I seek adventurers ready to become members, Lore's most legendary Heroes! Upgrade your account to become a Legend or purchase AdventureCoins to obtain exclusive gear. If you upgrade in June 2018, you'll unlock the ShadowScythe Warrior gear!  Djinn Summoner, Legend Shop Vendor Greetings! I seek adventurers ready to become members, Lore's most legendary Heroes! Upgrade your account to become a Legend or purchase AdventureCoins to obtain exclusive gear. If you upgrade in May 2018, you'll unlock the Archfiend DragonKnight gear!  Djinn Summoner, Legend Shop Vendor Greetings! I seek adventurers ready to become members, Lore's most legendary Heroes! Upgrade your account to become a Legend or purchase AdventureCoins to obtain exclusive gear. If you upgrade in April 2018, you'll unlock the Djinn Summoner gear.  Paragon Dreadnought, Legend Shop Vendor Greetings! I seek adventurers ready to become members, Lore's most legendary Heroes! Upgrade your account to become a Legend or purchase AdventureCoins to obtain exclusive gear. If you upgrade in March 2018, you'll unlock the Paragon Dreadnought gear.  Royal Paladin, Member Shop Vendor Greetings! I seek adventurers ready to become members, Lore's most legendary Heroes! Upgrade your account to become a Legend or purchase AdventureCoins to obtain exclusive gear. If you upgrade in February 2018, you'll unlock the Royal Paladin gear!  Void Overlord, Member Shop Vendor Greetings! I seek adventurers ready to become members, Lore's most legendary Heroes! Upgrade your account to become a member or purchase AdventureCoins to obtain exclusive gear. If you upgrade in January 2018, you'll unlock the Void Overlord gear!  Wolf Lord, Member Shop Vendor Greetings! I seek adventurers ready to become members, Lore's most legendary Heroes! Upgrade your account to become a member or purchase AdventureCoins to obtain exclusive gear. If you upgrade in November, you'll unlock the Wolf Lord gear!  BrightScythe Knight, Member Shop Vendor Greetings! I seek adventurers ready to become members, Lore's most legendary Heroes! Upgrade your account to become a member or purchase AdventureCoins to obtain exclusive gear. If you upgrade in November, you'll unlock the BrightScythe Knight gear!  Cryptlord, Member Shop Vendor Greetings! I seek adventurers ready to become members, Lore's most legendary Heroes! Upgrade your account to become a member or purchase AdventureCoins to obtain exclusive gear. If you upgrade in October, you'll unlock the CryptLord gear!  Golden Raider, Member Shop Vendor Greetings! I seek adventurers ready to become members, Lore's most legendary Heroes! Upgrade your account to become a member or purchase AdventureCoins to obtain exclusive gear. If you upgrade in September, you'll unlock the Golden Raider gear!  Void DragonGuard, Member Shop Vendor Greetings! I seek adventurers ready to become members, Lore's most legendary Heroes! Upgrade your account to become a member or purchase AdventureCoins to obtain exclusive gear. If you upgrade in August, you'll unlock the Void DragonGuard gear!  Shadowforce Commander, Member Shop Vendor Greetings! I seek adventurers ready to become members, Lore's most legendary Heroes! Upgrade your account to become a member or purchase AdventureCoins to obtain exclusive gear. If you upgrade in May, you'll unlock the LightStrike Commander gear!  ProtoParagon 3017, Member Shop Vendor Greetings! I seek adventurers ready to become members, Lore's most legendary Heroes! Upgrade your account to become a member or purchase AdventureCoins to obtain exclusive gear. If you upgrade in March, you'll unlock the ProtoParagon 3017 Gear!  Blood Samurai, Member Shop Vendor G
Lovingly made by Evan Hahn with contributions from Matt Dolan, Billy Ella, Russ Fink, Kevin Hiebert, Mathias Jakobsen, Stephen Judge, Ali Karbassi, Dan Kim, Zach Kirk, Eric Mill, Jacob Munch, Abhisek Pattnaik, Rob Pegoraro, Physician Family Financial Advisors, Roy Pitchon, Reuben Raveendran, Ray Schmtiz, Andrew Uhl, Ryan Ralph, and David Brownman. ❤  Want to add a website? Send me an email or send a pull request on GitHub. I'll credit you and the internet will love you forever.  Check this project out on GitHub, too. There are pictures of fire.
Are Apple, Stocks 'A Random Walk'? No; Anyone Can Time The Stock Market Bottom  9/28/2018 Unlike what some academics in finance say, investors can in fact time the stock market. First, use charts properly. Second,...  9/28/2018 Unlike what some academics in finance say, investors can in...
HBO - Xenia Rassolova/Obsev  On its own, Game of Thrones is a pretty gloomy show (which is putting it lightly, especially if you watched last season's finale). Yet, we just realized that it is possible for the series to get even grimmer. How, you ask? Well, all we'd have to do is let Tim Burton work his macabre magic while he turns GoT into an animator's dream (or, ya know, nightmare).  Published Obsev, illustrator Xenia Rassolova took Game of Thrones and gave it a classic Tim Burton twist. Margaery's limbs become lankier, Daenerys' hair develops a certain curl, and the Lannisters' eyes begin to bulge out of their sockets. And don't even get us started on the animals, who are basically all fangs, fangs, and more fangs. Take a look for yourself…  The entire cast surrounding the Iron Throne:  Xenia Rassolova/Obsev  Danerys Targaryen and her dragons:  Xenia Rassolova/Obsev  A bleeding Jon Snow and Ghost:  Xenia Rassolova/Obsev  Margaery Tyrell and the symbol of her house:  Xenia Rassolova/Obsev  The Lannisters:  Xenia Rassolova/Obsev  Sansa Stark:  Xenia Rassolova/Obsev  Bran and the Three-Eyed Raven:  Xenia Rassolova/Obsev  Samwell Tarly:  Xenia Rassolova/Obsev  To see what Tyrion Lannister and a White Walker would look like if Tim burton got his hands on them, head over to Obsev. Otherwise, you should definitely take a moment to imagine how the entire Game of Thrones world would look as an animated series. It's pretty great.
Treasurer Scott Morrison who has vowed to stick with the government proposed changes to superannuation to make savings that are opposed by some Liberal MPs, has warned taxes could rise if the measures do not pass.  He also said the changes will help reassure ratings agencies of Australia's AAA status after Moody's, Standard & Poors, and Fitch Ratings warned the government and the Senate that Australia's AAA credit rating will be threatened if budget repair is derailed in the next parliament.  "The changes we've made to superannuation do a number of things they make the superannuation system more fair and more sustainable and they make a significant contribution to bringing the budget back towards balance.  "Now that obviously has positive implications for reassuring ratings agencies but alone that measure will not be sufficient, I think, to address that concern. We need to go far beyond just that single measure there are many other measures that are in the budget that go towards completing that task.
☆☆☆ Smart Taskbar V2 is released in Google Playstore too! Search Smart Taskbar 2 to get yours. ☆☆☆   Launch any application instantly. Swipe your finger or click icon anytime in any App to bring up a mini sidebar for super fast app launching also works as app organizer, folder organizer, multi tasker, task killer, and shortcut manager.   If you want to use your phone one handed with complete touch experience, you find Android system takes too many steps to complete one simple job, or you need a faster way to get things organized, get Smart Taskbar to make your life easier.   Smart Taskbar is the first and origin of all similar app in this class. It is the most customizable and more complete in features. In addition, compare to others, Smart Taskbar requires way less steps, finger touch, to do what you want to do.   Language available in: English, French, Spanish, Russian, Chinese   Feature  *Build custom action (Need Pro)  Smart Taskbar doesn't just launch your installed APP, but also builds any combination of action such as direct phone call to someone or go to your bookmark for super fast without leaving your current window.   *Super fast launcher  Smart Taskbar is exceptionally designed to use your phone's CPU efficiently. The result is a super smooth and fast switching experience.   *5 quick launch spots (10 Spots in Pro Version)  Store your favorite apps or shortcut in any of the five spots for 2 steps instant access.   *Multi Tasker (multitasking)  Navigate to TASK label to see recent/running app in no time.   *Task killer (need pro)  Smart Taskbar also does task killer function to a more direct and intuitive level. Just click on any of the running app and it will be stopped instantly.   *App organizer  Your phone is packed with hundred of APPS? Use Smart Taskbar to create label to group them by function/usage/location.. whatever you like.   *Widget  Smart Taskbar takes widget support differently. Instead of showing your widget to Home screen, you use widget in Smart Taskbar just like launching a regular App. It is very convenient if you have too many widgets to show or you want higer security by not letting people easily see your social widgets at Home screen.   *Quick uninstaller  Quickly uninstall any installed app with just one finger click. No more walk through native Android settign trees for just a simple app uninstall action.   *Quick App setting management  One click to go to App info page for, super fast clear cache, clear data, force stop, and uninstall.   *Changeable Theme  Smart Taskbar now supports custom theme. Currently there are two built in themes to choose from (Default and Honeycomb style)
Section 1: Total population  This section primarily presents the preliminary population estimates for Canada, the provinces and territories on July 1, 2015, along with a concise analysis of the various components of population growth.  Slowdown in Canada's population growth  On July 1, 2015, Canada's population was estimated at 35.9 million, up 308,100 in the past year (2014/2015). The country's population growth rate was 0.9%, 1 down slightly from 2013/2014 (+1.1%) and the lowest growth observed since 1998/1999 (+0.8%). However, despite this slowdown, Canada's population growth remained the strongest among G7 2 countries. Canada's rate surpasses that of the United States (+0.7%), the United Kingdom (+0.2%), France (+0.4%), Germany (+0.1%), and Italy and Japan, whose populations remained relatively stable.  Natural increase is positive across the country  Population growth at the national level is based on two factors—natural increase 3 and net international migration 4 while provincial and territorial population estimates also factor in migration exchanges between provinces and territories. Over the past year, natural increase was estimated at 120,700, based on the difference between 388,700 births and 268,100 deaths according to preliminary estimates. The number of people added by natural increase in the past year (2014/2015) fell 8,400 over the previous year (2013/2014). This phenomenon is explained by a faster increase in the number of deaths than births, and is linked mainly to population aging, since a greater proportion of the population falls into the ages where the intensity of mortality is higher.  Population growth due mainly to international migration  Net international migration is an increasingly important driver of Canada's population growth, and since 1995/1996, has consistently been the main source of that growth. 5 In 2014/2015, net international migration was responsible for 60.8% of the population growth in Canada. By comparison, net international migration accounted on average for 34.7% of population growth in the 1980s. For the year ending June 30, 2015, net international migration was estimated at 187,400 people, down 27.7% from the previous year (+259,100) and at its lowest level in terms of numbers since 2002/2003.  More than 85% of immigrants settle in Ontario, Quebec, Alberta and British Columbia  In the year ending June 30, 2015, 239,800 immigrants took up residence in Canada, the first time in six years that this number has fallen below 250,000 and the lowest level since 2006/2007 (238,100). In 2014/2015, the immigration rate in Canada was estimated at 0.7%. In recent decades, the regional distribution of immigration in Canada has changed in favour of the western provinces and to the detriment mainly of Ontario, which has seen its share of immigrants decline over the past decade. In 2014/2015, Ontario continued to be the province that welcomed the most immigrants to the country with 37.3%, compared with 49.0% on average over the past 20 years.  The number of non-permanent residents is declining  Net non-permanent residents is the variation in the number of non-permanent residents on a specific date between two years. In 2014/ 2015, the number of net non-permanent residents (NPR) was negative (-10,300), indicating that the number of NPRs decreased between July 1, 2014 and July 1, 2015. This is the first time this situation has been seen since 1997/1998 (-4,000) and is the largest loss in NPRs since 1994/1995 (-14,200).  Emigration 6 was estimated at 42,000 for the year ending June 30, 2015 and continued to be concentrated mainly in four provinces: Ontario (38.8%), British Columbia (31.6%), Alberta (12.3%) and Quebec (11.7%).  More than four out of five Canadians live in four provinces  On July 1, 2015, almost 31 million Canadians (86.3%) lived in four provinces: Ontario (38.5%), Quebec (23.0%), British Columbia (13.1%) and Alberta (11.7%). Ontario remained Canada's most populous province, 13.8 million residents. The province with the smallest population was Prince Edward Island, with 146,400 residents. With 8.3 million residents, Quebec continued to rank second in terms of population size in Canada, followed by British Columbia with 4.7 million and Alberta with 4.2 million people.  Population growth in Alberta slows  Compared with 2013/2014, population growth 7 in the past year was weaker nationally and in most provinces, especially Alberta. However, population growth was more sustained in 2014/2015 in Nunavut (from +1.8% to +2.3%) and in Nova Scotia (from -0.1% to +0.1%). Preliminary estimates 8 for 2014/2015 show
Welcome to Amateur Creampies a place for people into watching REAL AMATEUR girls get their pussies filled with cum. This is the very first creampie site started by a guy and it's been online for almost 6 years now. All these girls are AMATEUR and I usually cum in them myself. Sometimes I even have some buddies help. Also there is a now a session for submitted AMATEUR creampie pictures from people around the world. There will be new sluts every month from my own efforts and from the submitted series.. I will post them on this page for you to take a look. Come in and Take a Tour or check out the creamed sluts. Inside the members area you will get new long videos every week, that's several scenes per month and basically a video tape worth of video every month. Click for Free Video >> Subscribe to Amateur Creampies Newsletter! Subscribe Unsubscribe
LOS ANGELES—Building upon his previous Burger King–related work, comedian Dane Cook announced plans Monday to tape an hour-long HBO stand-up special devoted entirely to the Texas Double Whopper, the latest menu offering from the fast-food giant.  "Bro, I got a solid 15 [minutes] on the name alone," said Cook on the "Danecast" video weblog feature on his MySpace page. "I'm still working out the kinks, but I'm probably gonna call it the 'T-Dubs' or maybe the 'Spicy Dub-Whops.'"  Advertisement  Cook said that the new burger, which substitutes jalapeño peppers and mustard for the original Double Whopper's mayonnaise and ketchup, has inspired him to "new creative heights." The routine came to the popular comic "in a flash" as he watched a Burger King TV spot for the sandwich during ESPN's World Series Of Poker.  Last week, HBO signed Cook to produce, write, and star in the special tentatively titled Dane Cook: Burgasm for an unprecedented $25 million, the highest amount the cable network has ever paid to a comedian for a one-time-only, fast-food-themed performance.  "When Dane told us what he had in mind, we couldn't sign off on it fast enough," HBO's Chairman and CEO Chris Albrecht said. "We love working with Dane. He's a truly energetic talent, and we're sure that whatever he comes up with, people will watch."  Advertisement  Cook said he completely scrapped all of his old fast-food material and, in his usual diligent way, spent several weeks creating hours of new Texas Double Whopper jokes, then "painfully" pared down the act to what he described on MySpace as "what you might call 'completely off the fucking hook.'"  "I'll ease the audience in by calling [the Texas Double Whopper] a 'sangwich,' and Burger King the 'BK Lounge,' but then I'll hit them with both barrels and call it the 'BK Lounge sangwich,'" Cook said. "You can expect me to pace some, then squat, then probably growl like I'm hungry, and say 'Huuuungry!' And to really hit it home, I'll climb up on the stool, howl, kick the stool over, and dive to the ground and do the worm. It looks totally spontaneous, but it's all carefully choreographed, and that's the beauty of it."  Advertisement  "I mean, the fucking thing has jalapeños on it, bro," Cook added. "Jalapeños."  Last month, Cook tested the new material in small comedy clubs across the country, trying out different inflections and pitches on newly created Cook-isms for soft-drink dispensers as well as gauging audience response to iterations of the word "dude."  "Stand-up comedy is an art form—it's not just writing and telling jokes," Cook said. "It requires your whole body and soul to gesticulate wildly and yell the same things about sesame seeds and mustard over and over at the audience in different voices until they laugh."  Advertisement  "And if there's a camera present, stand-up is an art form that's about putting your face as close as possible to that camera and screaming at it," Cook continued.  The taping is scheduled to take place in mid-April at Madison Square Garden. Plans are underway to erect a state-of-the-art hamburger-shaped set, and install nearly two dozen wide-screen TV monitors that will capture every subtle change in Cook's facial expressions as he performs for eager fans.  Advertisement  "I'm gonna need all that shit when I launch into my 20-minute bit about ketchup packets," Cook said. "That's when I really start running around. And screaming, bro."  While Cook revealed that he will wear a new white T-shirt, leather wristband, and a pair of specially designed jeans, and has promised to pepper his performance with several crowd-pleasing callbacks to the most "pivotal" cheese and pickle jokes, he declined to disclose any further details.  "I want all my fans to be surprised, but I will say that a significant portion of [the special] will focus on the time when the dude I ordered from at the BK Lounge looked at me all like, 'Pfffffffft,'" said Cook, contorting his face into a cross-eyed, puckered grimace. "Swear to fucking God, bro, 'Pfffffffft!' Just like that!"  Advertisement  "Bro, 'Pfffffffft!'" Cook said.  Cook refused to comment on rumors that he has modified his "Superfinger"—an obscene gesture
The Atheist Alliance of America National Convention 2014 held earlier this month in Seattle, Washington granted me the opportunity to interview, converse with, and listen to renowned speakers, comedians, and influencers in the atheist movement including the likes of David Fitzgerald, Dr. Steven Pinker, Dr. Rebecca Goldstein, Richard Haynes and Dr. Richard Carrier.  This year's convention drew in approximately 100 attendees throughout the weekend, according to Amy Monsky, Executive Director of Atheist Alliance of America (AAA). Monsky states that the AAA National Convention has several primary goals including: to bring atheists together; to hear great speakers; to network and socialize; and to raise awareness through education.  The family-friendly event was comprised of educational and activist-oriented sessions, debate, a comedy show, VIP non-prayer breakfast, film by Jeremiah Camara, "2014 Richard Dawkins Award" banquet, and a Sunday outing to Snoqualmie Falls and Chateau Ste. Michelle Winery.  Below is an overview of the sessions I attended, the conversations I had with presenters and experts, and the interviews I conducted.  Horus Gilgamesh: Atheism Can Cause Death Threats  According to Monsky, there were last-minute changes made to the program when one of the speakers, author Horus Gilgamesh (pen name) of "Awkward Moments Not Found in Your Average Children's Bible" blog, received a death threat to his home address prior to the convention. Subsequently, he decided not to attend the conference for safety reasons.  The letter revealed the blogger's identity reading, "Hello Horus or should I call you [real name]?"  The letter, posted on the author's blog, concluded with: "I'll see you up in Seattle next week. You won't see me."  Signed: "God's Little Helper."  Monsky further stated that the letter was "creepy, but what was especially disturbing about it was because it had his real identity and real address..."  Many of the speakers and attendees wrote Horus Gilgamesh on their name badges to show their support and solidarity for the atheist blogger.  Secularism in Schools  In the session, "Game Changer: Getting School Administrators to Seek out Organized Secularism", August Brunsman, Executive Director of Secular Student Alliance, spoke to the increasing need for secular groups on university campuses. Currently, Secular Student Alliance has 300 groups nationwide promoting secular and nontheistic values through community, advocacy, service, and education.  Brunsman posits that religious organizations like Campus Crusade for Christ (Cru) tend to have more staff members and campus organizers nationwide. Thus, having greater influence on university campuses across the country. Brunsman noted that a key area of growth for the organization is to expand their administrative staff to provide greater services to each of their groups.  A primary issue in continuing to scale the organization is that "over 90% of funding for Secular Student Alliance comes from individual donors."  With increased interest from nontheist affiliate groups, Brunsman hopes to continue maximizing the efforts of Secular Student Alliance to U.S. university campuses. Secular Student Alliance affiliates welcome atheists, agnostics, humanists, freethinkers, skeptics, naturalists, Pastafarians and many others.  Ask an Atheist  The Washington-based weekly radio show, "Ask an Atheist," is dedicated to atheism, skepticism, Secular Humanism, and issues of separation of church and state.  I spoke with Executive Producer Sam Mulvey after his session "Blasphemy Laws & You." I welcomed Mulvey's thoughts regarding the separation of church and state in relation to Mars Hill Church founding Pastor Mark Driscoll's rants promoting misogyny, homophobia, among other forms of prejudices.  While Mulvey disagrees with Driscoll's teachings, he believes that Driscoll should be protected by the First Amendment. However, Mulvey adds that this is a complex issue and that the state should take interest if people begin to act on Driscoll's beliefs and if people are getting hurt.  Note: As of the publication of this article the masses have risen against Driscoll, calling for his removal from the pulpit, pulling his books from the bookshelves, and even isolating him from a network he helped build.  Religious Freedom Hurts Women  The Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993 (RFRA) has recently influenced the Hobby Lobby decision. Hobby Lobby, a craft store chain, and its sister company, Mardel Christian bookstore, asked for an exemption from an Obamacare requirement that it provide insurance coverage for morning-after pills and other emergency birth control methods and devices, according to Constitution Daily.  Diana Castillo, State Chapter Coordinator for Secular Coalition for America and presenter at the AAA Convention, believes the RFRA is preventing adequate
SAN JOSE — Santa Clara County officials are poised to approve sweeping rules governing police use of cell phone trackers and other spying technology that advocates say will be a model for the nation but that cops worry could hamper investigations.  "Santa Clara County is asking and answering the right questions," said Nicole Ozer of the ACLU's Northern California chapter. "It's going to be a model for moving forward for other cities and counties."  But the sheriff's and district attorney's offices have both said that the ordinance could prove cumbersome because of the need to report on what's being done in the field with surveillance technology.  "Our concern involves the tediousness of trying to log and capture daily uses among several hundred deputies in the streets," said Assistant Sheriff Ken Binder, referring to proposed body-worn cameras for deputies falling under the auspices of the ordinance. "How do we chart that and report it at the end of the year? It makes the job more onerous in terms of doing the job and investigative work."  County Supervisor Joe Simitian's proposal for an electronic surveillance ordinance has been in the works since late 2014. Such privacy concerns have garnered greater scrutiny in Santa Clara County since then because of the sheriff's plan, since suspended, to quietly acquire a cellphone tracking device commonly called a Stingray.  Similar conflicts over police spying and privacy have arisen numerous times locally and around the nation. Examples include the San Jose Police Department's acquisition of a drone, the use and retention of information captured on license plate readers and the creation of a "Domain Awareness Center" electronic information aggregation hub in Oakland.  The proposed Santa Clara County ordinance would apply only to Santa Clara County agencies, and not prohibit the use of surveillance evidence coming from outside jurisdictions — the district attorney's prosecution of a San Jose police case, for example, or a tip coming in from another agency regarding a fugitive whose license plate was picked up on a scanner.  State Sen. Jerry Hill, D-San Mateo, passed bills last fall that require agencies to let the public know about the acquisition of a Stingray or license plate reader.  Simitian's ordinance, which is being finalized and expected to go before the full board sometime in May, goes much further and mandates that government agencies publicly establish a policy before any new surveillance technology is acquired or used. It also requires annual reports on how the technology is used and what the results have been. What makes it different from other ordinances around the nation is that rather than target named gadgets, the language encompasses any surveillance-related technology, including what can't be foreseen. Simitian has called it "future-proof."  In Seattle, for example, regulations were tied to "a finite set of technologies" and the laws "were obsolete as soon as they were passed," wrote ACLU attorney Matt Cagle in an April 13 letter to the county's Finance and Government Operations Committee, which heard the matter on Thursday and forwarded it to the Board of Supervisors with a recommendation for approval.  "Santa Clara is the farthest along, and it's certainly an issue many Californians want to see at a local level," Ozer said.. She pointed to recent revelations that San Jose and Oakland police have been quietly using a social media monitoring tool as an example of why rules need to be flexible.  Ozer cited a Tulchin Research poll that found 67 percent of 800 voters surveyed wanted to see local-level government approve police surveillance methods before they are used.  The Santa Clara County model also makes it a misdemeanor to intentionally abuse such technology — something advocates say is important because, otherwise, any violations would be handled internally at an administrative level to questionable effect.  Supervisor Cindy Chavez, who co-chairs the committee that reviewed the proposed ordinance, was sympathetic to law enforcement concerns. But Simitian said the reports would be quantitative in nature, not case-specific.  "I'm surprised this concern lingers," he said. "I was very direct, very clear — there's not an expectation in this ordinance that we'd get an item-by-item list of interactions any more than we would say that we want frame-by-frame review of everything that's captured on a closed-circuit television camera."  The Electronic Frontier Foundation, a San Francisco-based group that advocates on tech privacy issues, called finding the balance between being too specific and too broad a "tough nut to crack."  "We particularly praise the proposal's recognition of a pattern and practice among law enforcement departments to seek forgiveness rather than permission," wrote Shahid Buttar of the foundation in a February letter to the committee.  Brian Hofer, who worked with an ad hoc committee in Oakland to regulate a proposed information collection hub that caused a stir in that city, agreed that the county is on the right track.  "It's an approach that we think all local governments should follow, and it brings stuff that's in the shadows out into the public arena
The Associated Press   ISLAMABAD -- Pakistan's Foreign Ministry says Islamabad has ratified the landmark Paris Agreement which requires signatory countries to take steps to limit global warming.  In a statement Friday, the ministry said the pact was ratified in a ceremony at the U.N. headquarters in New York. The Paris deal calls for keeping global temperature increases below 2 degrees Centigrade (3.6 degrees Fahrenheit) compared with preindustrial times.  Pakistan committed to the accord in April.  Climate change in recent years has caused deadly heatwaves in Pakistan's southern Sindh province. Earlier this month, the city of Lahore was engulfed in heavy smog for several days.
The University of Melbourne and the State Library Victoria have formed a partnership to commemorate Ireland's 1916 Easter Rising, considered a pivotal moment in the formation of the modern Irish nation. A free public exhibition, The Irish Rising – A terrible beauty is born is open at State Library Victoria until the end of July and traces the impact this uprising had 17,000km away in Australia.  By Eoin Hahessy  On Easter Monday 1916 nearly 2000 Irish men and women drawn from nationalist and socialist strands seized buildings across Ireland's capital Dublin and declared an Irish republic. Britain, in the midst of World War One, scrambled to react to this test of its authority, at the very centre of the British Empire.  Ireland's ill-prepared rebels were no match for the world's only superpower and after six bitter days of street fighting the Irish would surrender. The swift court martial and execution of 14 leaders of the 1916 Rising bellowed Irish nationalist flames to create an independent republic, leading to the eventual formation of today's modern Ireland.  While the 1916 Rising played a significant role in propelling Ireland towards independence, often forgotten in the narrative is the impact this had on the social and political trajectory of other nations. The most popular recounting is its inspiration for a rising in Bengal, India, yet its lasting impact in another great centre of Irish emigration, Australia, has received scant focus.  Prior to 1916 the leaders of the Irish community in Australia followed fastidiously the footprints of John Redmond's Home Rule movement, who desired for Ireland to remain within the British Empire. This was an Irish community a generation removed from the harrows of the Irish famine. A generation that savoured a different flavour to English rule, striving in a colony where rigid social classes, while defined, could be punctured by following the social playbook of the time.  Archbishop Liam Mannix. Picture: State Library of Victoria  1916 changed the mood of the Irish-Australian community and through the Archbishop of Melbourne, Cork-born Daniel Mannix, a potent force of Irish nationalism was awakened and a Catholic force in Australian politics was unleashed that still leaves a bitter taste in a generation of Australians today.  "Michael they have shot them," wept Archbishop Mannix to his caretaker in Melbourne after hearing of the execution of the leaders of Easter Rising. Just as the execution of these leaders helped turn the public tide of opinion back home, it stirred the leader of a slumbering Catholic flock into political action.  "Something in Daniel Mannix was released in the aftermath of the Easter Rising," writes biographer Brenda Niall in a recent and welcomingly fresh insight of an Irish man who loomed over Australian politics for nearly 50 years. Mannix was alone in taking the side of the rebels among the Australian archbishops.  He linked the Rising with World War One and mobilised a Catholic community on a national question that tested the allegiance to the Empire of this newly-born nation.  Twice the subject of conscription was defeated in Australia, in 1916 and again in 1917, and Mannix's colourful public duel with Australian Prime Minister Billy Hughes both contributed to its defeat and led to the first split in Australia's Labor Party.  The Irish have "killed conscription", lamented Hughes in a cable to British Prime Minister Lloyd George. Ireland's Easter Rising was the charge that shaped a political force on the other side of the world.  The Rising inconveniently challenged the entire concept of Empire and provoked a superpower to rash reaction. "If you tell your Empire in India, in Egypt, and all over the world that you do not got the men, the money, the pluck, the inclination and the backing to restore order in a country within twenty miles of your own shore, you may as well begin to abandon the attempt to make British rule prevail throughout the Empire at all," warned Edward Carson in 1916 to a nervous British establishment.  This British reaction deepened the cracks in the edifice of their Empire. "Even though a rebellion in Dublin might seem relatively minor in the grand scheme of things," says Professor of Irish Studies at Notre Dame, Declan Kiberd, "it would actually be the pin piercing the heart of the imperial giant."
Whether it's red tape, business rates or the UK's relationship with the rest of Europe, take part in our poll to let us know what's on your mind in the run up to the election  What's your top small business concern in the May election?  In the run up to the general election, political parties are outlining a range of policies to support the UK's estimated 5.2 million small businesses.  If you haven't yet decided how to vote on May 7, what's the most pressing business issue that needs to be addressed in order to sway you?  Have your say by taking part in our poll. If your concerns aren't covered in the drop-down menu, there's an option to leave your own comment.  Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here for more advice, insight and best practice direct to your inbox.
Trump ramping up for Texas trip as flooding ravages Houston The president is prepping for a high-stakes visit even as he's still struggling with prior self-inflicted controversies.  President Donald Trump and first lady Melania Trump are heading to storm-ravaged Texas on Tuesday as the commander in chief confronts the largest natural disaster of his presidency, even as he is dealing with the fallout from other self-produced controversies.  Trump is expected to sidestep Houston — Texas Gov. Greg Abbott told "CBS This Morning" that Trump will avoid the area so as not to interrupt evacuations and emergency responses to the devastating flooding in that area.  Story Continued Below  That decision highlights the thin line between politicians showing their concern by visiting in the aftermath of a natural disaster and becoming a distraction given the resources required for a presidential visit. Former President George W. Bush acknowledged years later that it was a "huge mistake" to have an image taken of him flying over New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina because, he lamented, he looked "detached and uncaring."  Trump so far has been active on Twitter, showing that he's on top of the latest storm developments and is meeting regularly with top aides to ensure resources are getting to victims. He's also signed disaster declarations for both Texas and parts of Louisiana and told reporters in the Oval Office on Monday afternoon that he's eagerly anticipating his upcoming travel.  "I'll be going to Texas tomorrow. I look very much forward to it," Trump said. "We don't know exactly which sections — we'll be notifying you soon — but we'll be traveling throughout certain parts, and we may actually go back on Saturday. Depending on where the storm goes, we may also go to Louisiana on Saturday."  Trump, however, is still on the defensive over his Charlottesville response and the decision to drop a load of controversial news under the cover of Hurricane Harvey on Friday, including his pardon of controversial former Arizona Sheriff Joe Arpaio, the formalization of his transgender military ban and the ouster of national security aide Sebastian Gorka.  The most reliable politics newsletter. Sign up for POLITICO Playbook and get the latest news, every morning — in your inbox. Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.  His non-storm-related woes appeared to deepen over the weekend as Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and Defense Secretary Jim Mattis both distanced themselves from Trump, with Tillerson on Sunday telling Fox News that when it comes to Charlottesville and American values, "The president speaks for himself," and Mattis recently urging troops to "hold the line" until divisions in the nation ease.  The combination of natural disaster and self-inflicted controversies marks a particularly rocky stretch of his presidency that may get worse as Trump faces an end-of-September deadline to avert a government shutdown and strike a deal on the debt ceiling with lawmakers he's increasingly estranged from.  Still, the trip to Texas provides an opportunity for Trump to produce a presidential moment, which the White House tried to play up on Monday.  Vice President Mike Pence did multiple radio interviews in which he promoted Trump's trip, saying the president is "anxious" to visit and convey to Texans that "we are with you."  "I know the president and the first lady have been very anxious to come to the area, to see firsthand the efforts that are underway," Pence told Trey Ware in a radio interview on KTSA.  "The president wants to be there and make sure the families and all of those affected and our first responders know that we are with you," said Pence, who added that Trump has been "continuously updated" and "fully engaged." "He's deployed the full resources of the national government. He'll reflect on that tomorrow and people can just be confident that as we move through this rescue operation, that we're there for the long haul. We're there for the long haul with Texas through the recovery efforts, but now's the time to focus on lifesaving efforts."  Harvey arrived late Friday as a Category 4 storm, battering the barrier islands near Corpus Christi, Texas, before moving northeast and dropping record rainfall amounts on the Houston area, parts of which are low-lying and prone to flooding.  In his radio interviews with Texas media, the vice president said the federal government has placed more than 8,000 federal officials in Texas and shipped more than 1 million meals and 1 million liters of water. Pence commended state and local officials for their response and praised Texans for their strength and resilience.  Extensive flooding from Harvey devastated parts of Texas over the weekend and is responsible for at least five deaths. About 30,000 people are expected to be housed in emergency shelters.  The slow-moving storm is expected to continue to create significant amounts of rain for the region through at least the first half of this week. And Pence urged everyone in the area to listen to
Sunni Death Cult  Last March, in response to allegations of blasphemy from a Christian man in Lahore, a crowd of demonstrators torched over a hundred buildings in a Christian neighbourhood of the city. Authorities responded swiftly, reprimanding and arresting those who took place in the violence. Still though, they were unable to ease fears that Pakistan is being seized by a genocidal impulse against its religious minorities, including an increasingly fearful Christian population. The immolation of a Christian couple in Lahore last week, after an angry mob was incited by a local mullah, has renewed these concerns.  The Lahore pogrom took place after an alleged blasphemer was arrested under Section 295-C of the Pakistan Penal Code. Section 295-C specifically outlaws sacrilegious portrayals of the Prophet Muhammad, and is one of the infamous "blasphemy laws" that blend English penal codes with reactionary Pakistani Islamism. The cocktail dates back to the British Raj, when the Indian Penal Code was passed in 1860 after being originally prepared by Lord Macaulay. The Code was part of a series of reforms that were passed after the 1857 Sepoy rebellion, and Pakistan inherited it after Partition without significant overhaul. The sections in which the Raj sought to regulate Islamic conduct and inauthentic religious expression were maintained, and have periodically been used to sanction violence against those who deviate from an established line of increasingly Wahhabi orthodoxy.  Christians have been targeted with particular animosity, and the blasphemy cases themselves have become an outlet for popular rage, owing to their harsh penalties and light burden of proof. Despite carrying the maximum punishment of death, there are no fixed standards for evidence or procedure. Trials have taken place where intent is never proven on the part of the accused, and witnesses have been allowed to refrain from describing the actual crime so as not to "repeat the blasphemy." As a result, entire proceedings can reach completion without the accused ever being told their alleged crime. Many cases also involve local disputes between Muslims and Christians that simply evolved into the latter being accused of blasphemy, with the former taking advantage of their ability to use the state to harass and violate Christians (and non-Sunnis in general) at Sunni Muslim leisure.  International outcry, particularly in the cases of Asia Bibi and Mohammed Asghar, has led to many governments and human rights organizations pressing the Pakistani government for reform. It is not that easy. Blasphemy laws have become a brutal part of the Pakistani social fabric. They have interwoven themselves into the complex power relations that constitute the country today, and are simply one manifestation of a growing trend of nationalist belligerence from Pakistan's Sunni Muslim majority. This is a large part of the reason why recent attempts at reform have collapsed. When Bibi's case gained worldwide attention in 2010, the ruling Pakistan People's Party agreed to reevaluate the Penal Code and potentially repeal the laws altogether.  Three politicians were particularly outspoken: Governor Salman Taseer of Punjab, National Assemblyman Shahbaz Bhatti, and parliamentarian Sherry Rehman. Rehman spearheaded the initiative, and was ultimately forced to scale back from public life after Bhatti was killed by Talibani assassins, and Taseer was shot dead by a bodyguard who was later greeted with rose pedals from spectators at his murder trial. Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani eventually shelved the reforms altogether. Pakistani Sunni fundamentalists require enough intimidation of minority groups, like the Christians, in order to mobilize politically, that reforms provoke intense violence.  The core of the issue is that blasphemy convictions, and the vigilante justice that is provoked by unsubstantiated accusations of transgression, inevitably lead to murder, because many Pakistanis need the release. According to the Islamabad-based Centre for Security Studies, at least 52 people have been killed after being accused of blasphemy since 1990, much of the time by angry mobs. Angry mobs don't come out of nowhere, they need to get whipped into a frenzy, and directed at a perceived target. It should come as no surprise that Pakistani Sunnis have growing frustrations in an era of severe inequality and growing state violence. The situation usually demands a scapegoat, which in Pakistan, is usually a Christian, Shi'i Muslims, or Ahmaddiyah. The accusation of blasphemy isn't meant to frame a reasoned discussion about religious representation, and a careful evaluation of the evidence. It is meant to give angry Sunnis permission to relieve their anxieties by attacking an allegedly anti-Islamic target. Christians, as well as Shi'i and Ahmaddiyah Muslims, become projections of our own worst qualities that need to be expunged.  If all of this sounds familiar, it is because there are many parallels between Pakistani anti-Christian politics, and religious racism in the West. Obviously, this comparison has limitations, not the least of which is the fact that ongoing state failures mean that pogroms occur with more frequency in Pakistani cities than they do in Europe, today. Abstract
This forum is for law school graduates only who have verified their law school graduate status with TLS. Emailwith the word "Verification" and your username in the subject, along with two pictures from different angles of your diploma and a scrap of paper with your username on it.
About Me (Dave)  Hi all,  My name is Dave and I own and run Dave's Wargames.  We have been established for about 1 year and are a business based in the North of England.  I first started the business after designing a paint pot holder on a friends laser cutter. I quickly decided to invest in my own machine of a larger size to allow me to design and cut all of the products that I make.  Reason behind the kickstarter  Over the past year I have toured UK war games shows to let people know about the business and products that I currently offer. The response has been great and I would like to give more people the chance to enjoy my products.  Using Kickstarter allows anybody interested in my products an easily accessible platform from which to purchase them at a discounted rate.  Main Kickstarter Products  The main products that I would like to promote through this kickstarter are my 28mm 1/56th scale WW2 buildings.  The package that I have available is the village pack which includes 2 Town houses, 1 Shop, 1 Ruined Shop and 1 Ruined House. On top of this pack I will also be including 6 sections of double sided six inch wall sections and 10 pin/casualty markers.  This pack is ideal if you are just starting to play WW2 table top games like bolt action, chain of command etc. Or if you are expanding your terrain collection.  Each building has a removable roof and top floor to allow access to both the ground and upper floor. The buildings have detailed internal walls separate doors and windows, the shop even comes with a counter and shelving, each building comes with a staircase to.  Add-ons  I have added a list of add-ons for everyone to add on to there pledge if required, just add the amount to your pledge once the kickstarter is completed you can identify which add-ons you have selected  Radar Station - £12  Great objective building with a removable roof  Wall Sections - £8  6 straight wall sections 3 corner sections 2 T-sections  Pin Markers - £5  10 dial style pin markers numbered 1-12  FREE TOOL HOLDER FOR EVERY PLEDGE OF £14 OR MORE  Tool Holder  The pictures below show the external details of all of the buildings.  Radar Station Front  Radar Station Removable Roof  WW2 Town House  WW2 Shop  Ruined Shop  Ruined House  Internal Detail Pictures  Ruined Shop Internal  Ruined House Internal  Ruined House Internal 2  Shop Ground Floor  Shop First Floor  Town House Ground Floor  Town House First Floor  Other Products  I also have available some hobby items allowing you to store your paint collections in handy space saving racks. The Citadel one will hold 33 Games Workshop paints and the Vallejo one will hold 55 Vallejo paints.  Citadel Paint Stand  Vallejo Paint Stand  Design and Implementation  All products in this kickstarter have already been designed and produced previously meaning that there will be no wait time after the kickstarter ends before production can commence.  More about Dave's Wargames  If you are wanting to know more about Dave's Wargames or any of the products please feel free to come over to our Facebook page and drop a like https://www.facebook.com/Daveswargames/  or drop us an email Davewargames@googlemail.com   Please note postage costs are calculated when you click on a pledge and buyers are responsible for all customs charges imposed for there country.
Exploration activity has been brought to a near standstill after a data-encrypting firmware bug threatened to compromise recently acquired astronomical data. A spokesperson for Universal Cartographics released the following statement: "Commanders started noting discrepancies between the exploration records stored in their ship systems and their own personal records. When we investigated, we found that one of our contractors has purposely altered a recent firmware update that was applied to all discovery and surface scanners. We also found that the contractor had a connection to Emperor's Dawn. An arrest warrant has been issued, and our staff worked through the weekend to recover the encrypted data and replace the compromised firmware."   After months of research, scientists working for the Canonn Interstellar Research Group observed a change in the transmissions emanating from the so-called 'unknown artefacts', also known as 'anomalous extraterrestrial objects' (or AEOs). Now the organisation believes it has decoded at least part of these strange transmissions. Startlingly, the messages appear to contain schematic diagrams of the ships being used to study the objects.   Gutamaya Shipyards' latest vessel, the Imperial Eagle, is now available for purchase for any pilot holding the appropriate rank in the Imperial Navy, and positive consumer feedback is already flooding in. Commander Corrigendum, operating in the Prism system, said: "The Imperial Eagle is a blast to fly. It handles beautifully and has looks to match. I was able to stick on the tail of an Imperial Courier during combat exercises. It's a great addition to the Gutamaya portfolio." Commander Stateira 'Starcloak' Eleshenar added: "I love my Eagle, so I was curious to see if Gutamaya could improve on Core Dynamics' classic design. Now I've taken it out a few times, I'm happy to say it retains all the sublime responsiveness of the Eagle, and packs a harder punch in combat." Exploration activity has been brought to a near standstill after a data-encrypting firmware bug threatened to compromise recently acquired astronomical data. A spokesperson for Universal Cartographics released the following statement: "Commanders started noting discrepancies between the exploration records stored in their ship systems and their own personal records. When we investigated, we found that one of our contractors has purposely altered a recent firmware update that was applied to all discovery and surface scanners. We also found that the contractor had a connection to Emperor's Dawn. An arrest warrant has been issued, and our staff worked through the weekend to recover the encrypted data and replace the compromised firmware."Exploration activity has been brought to a near standstill after a data-encrypting firmware bug threatened to compromise recently acquired astronomical data. A spokesperson for Universal Cartographics released the following statement: "Commanders started noting discrepancies between the exploration records stored in their ship systems and their own personal records. When we investigated, we found that one of our contractors has purposely altered a recent firmware update that was applied to all discovery and surface scanners. We also found that the contractor had a connection to Emperor's Dawn. An arrest warrant has been issued, and our staff worked through the weekend to recover the encrypted data and replace the compromised firmware."After months of research, scientists working for the Canonn Interstellar Research Group observed a change in the transmissions emanating from the so-called 'unknown artefacts', also known as 'anomalous extraterrestrial objects' (or AEOs). Now the organisation believes it has decoded at least part of these strange transmissions. Startlingly, the messages appear to contain schematic diagrams of the ships being used to study the objects.Gutamaya Shipyards' latest vessel, the Imperial Eagle, is now available for purchase for any pilot holding the appropriate rank in the Imperial Navy, and positive consumer feedback is already flooding in. Commander Corrigendum, operating in the Prism system, said: "The Imperial Eagle is a blast to fly. It handles beautifully and has looks to match. I was able to stick on the tail of an Imperial Courier during combat exercises. It's a great addition to the Gutamaya portfolio." Commander Stateira 'Starcloak' Eleshenar added: "I love my Eagle, so I was curious to see if Gutamaya could improve on Core Dynamics' classic design. Now I've taken it out a few times, I'm happy to say it retains all the sublime responsiveness of the Eagle, and packs a harder punch in combat."
Brides Seeing Their Brides For The First Time On Their Wedding Day  Forget the big kiss, nothing is more beautiful than the the "reveal" moment right before the ceremony. Photographers from The New Art Of Capturing Love provide ample evidence.
737 votes  "Lost Queen"  Only the two three teams from Areishia Spirit Academy can participate in the Blade Dance. Also, the teams need to be made up of five members each. Due to their lack of members and teamwork, Clare and Kamito find their school ranking constantly falling. Then Grayworth introduces him to a young girl... ... more
Every "Garb Day," as the triplets call it, they wait excitedly for their friends — Andrew Black, Rob Whitmore, and Chad Cover — to show up.  "The crew gets out of the truck and they high-five the babies and give fist bumps and we talk," their mother, Martha Sugalski, told BuzzFeed. "They spend 10 to 15 minutes with us every Tuesday and Friday."
Anti-martial law protesters took to the streets in Woodside, Queens, calling for peace and security in Marawi and the immediate lifting of martial law in Mindanao.  In an interview, Bernadette Ellorin of Bayan USA said one of the biggest fears with the declaration of martial law in Mindanao is that "history has already shown us that martial law leads to egregious human rights abuses."  'Killings, abductions, torture, displacement, bombings… so the Filipino people don't want that anymore," Ellorin said.  Labor rights lawyer Attorney Felix Vinluan believes President Duterte's declaration of martial law in Mindanao is an overkill to what he calls a "local peace and order situation" in Marawi City.  Vinluan said the martial law declaration should be challenged in Philippine courts and stopped before it becomes a nationwide martial law.  "We've been trying to give him the benefit of the doubt, but I think lumalabas yung dictatorial tendencies niya. No wonder he's so friendly with the Marcoses," he said.  Other Filipinos, however, reacted differently to news about the martial law declaration.  "I cannot blame all those who suffered during martial law, and if they have ideas na parang bumabalik sa kanila but at the same time we want to trust the president," said Duterte supporter Omar Ali.  "I am against declaring martial law all over the country, if it gets to that."  A son of veteran Muslim politician Ali Dimaporo also noted: "We believe in you President Duterte, so we know you're very extra cautious with the martial law that you're trying to have right now. Ang hope lang is sana nga, it is for the good of the people."  Kababayans in the Big Apple plan to continue anti-martial law demonstrations until Duterte lifts martial law in the southern Philippines.  Read more on Balitang America.
The Ultimate Fighter Latim America 3 Finale is just around the corner and . . . wow. Let's just call it UFC: Mouthful. As Rafael Dos Anjos and Tony Ferguson prepare to fight for a shot at the lightweight title--the same belt that Dos Anjos seemed certain to keep just a few months ago--the entire event seems overshadowed by the tentpole extravaganza around the corner: UFC 205. With a stacked undercard, three title fights, and the charismatic anchor of Conor McGregor at its head, it's no wonder that this weekend's card is flying a little bit under the radar.  That goes double for the men and women on the undercard. Dos Anjos and Ferguson are elite lightweights with reputations for exciting fights. They won't draw the same crowds as McGregor and crew, but people will show up to see them. The undercard fighters are much more likely to get lost in the shuffle, and with a slew of other UFC events right around the corner, it's not hard to imagine the average MMA fan feeling a little bit lost.  That is the reason for this piece. With this Fight Monitor, we will look at some of the overshadowed fighters on this weekend's undercard, because there is truly no shortage of exciting, promising, and very skilled talent. If you're a fight fan in need of guidance, consider this your programme. These are the fighters you need to keep an eye on.  Rafael Dos Anjos and Tony Ferguson may be the main event of UFC Mexico, but they are not the only attraction. Photo by Joshua Dahl, USA Today Sports.  ALEXA GRASSO  Women's Strawweight (115 lbs)  Age: 23  Pro Experience: 4 years (December, 2012 debut)  Record: 8-0, 4 (T)KO  If you pay attention to one undercard fighter at the TUF Finale, make it Alexa Grasso. The women's strawweight division is stacked as it is. Next weekend Joanna Jedrzejczyk will defend her title against Karolina Kowalkiewicz, but they merely straddle the shark tank that is the 115-pound weight class. Jessica Aguilar, Rose Namajunas, Paige VanZant, Joanne Calderwood, Jessica Andrade, Tecia Torres . . . of the two women's divisions in the UFC, strawweight is by far the most comparable to the best of the men, with a deep talent pool, a dominant champion, and a whole host of prospects and up-and-comers.  Of that latter group, Alexa Grasso is one of the most exciting. At just 23 years of age with only four years under her belt, she is unbelievably poised in the cage. She presents a calm exterior to all of her opponents, even as she picks them apart with surgical precision.  What she has: In a division full of dangerous strikers, Grasso stands to become one of the very best. Her game is built around those most trustworthy tools of the expert boxer, the jab and the straight right hand. No surprise there, as Grasso comes from a boxing family. Her father, Francisco Grasso, was a professional boxer in his time. And though the words "Mexican style" have come to mean "brawler" in the modern boxing world, Grasso's calculated style is more in line with the likes of Vicente Saldivar and Marco Antonio Barrera. She can scrap, sure. But her true talent lies in her ability to utterly control her opponent before taking them apart, piece by piece.  Take Grasso's last performance as evidence of not only her potential, but the deep well of skill of which she is already possessed. Jodie Esquibel challenged Grasso at Invicta 18, and despite no small amount of talent and the cornering of one of the best gyms in the world, she was virtually powerless to stop the Mexican pugilist from having her way. Grasso did not take control of the fight by force, but by finesse. She stung Esquibel with the jab. She crumpled her with a kick to the liver, and followed up with vicious knees in the clinch. She split Esquibel's nose with a right hand, and nearly finished her in the third round.  And all of this while wearing a face to rival that of Fedor Emelianenko, although--and I don't think the Last Emperor would mind my saying so--a good deal prettier.  What she needs: More than anything, Grasso would benefit from a little ringcraft--or cagecraft, if you prefer. As of her last fight, she is far too willing to allow herself to be backed up into the fence. Grasso has the footwork to avoid this: she takes small steps, comfortably moving in every direction, and pivots well. The problem
Required Software  1 . [XPGFS] NOAA Weather plug-in 2.3 for X-Plane  The [XPGFS] NOAA Weather plug-in by Joan Perez i Cauhé is required. It will write live NOAA Metar data based winds, temperature and pressure to X-Plane and hand visibility to Ventura Sky. It is fully compatible since version 2.3 and will automatically recognize that Ventura Sky is running. Installing the plug-in will require a Python installation to your operating system (Attention: If you're running a 64-Bit OS, make sure to get a 64-Bit Python installer!), as well as Sandy Barbour's Python interface plug-in for X-Plane. Joan offers very convenient installation options for all three things, all three are free:  http://x-plane.joanpc.com/plugins/xpgfs-noaa-weather  Before you proceed with the installation of Ventura Sky, please make sure the NOAA plug-in is up and running. Both Python Interface and the NOAA Weather plug-in need to show up in X-Plane's Plug-in dropdown. This is essential, Ventura Sky will not work if something went wrong during the installation of Python, Python Interface and the NOAA plug-in. The NOAA plug-in doesn't require any settings change once installed - it'll work out of the box.  2 . FlyWithLua plug-in 2.4.3 for X-Plane  Ventura Sky is a FlyWithLua script and therefore requires the FlyWithLua 2.4.3 plug-in for X-Plane, which is available for free on X-Plane.org:  http://forums.x-plane.org/index.php?/files/file/17468-flywithlua-for-xp9-and-xp10/  3 . SkyMaxx Pro 3+ and Real Weather Connector  Ventura Sky uses X-Plane datarefs to build the atmosphere and this prohibits X-Plane's own clouds to be drawn (Ventura Sky pushes X-Plane's cloud layers up above 44.000ft). You need SkyMaxx Pro 3+ and Real Weather Connector to inject clouds based on NOAA Metar data. Recommended setting for SkyMaxx Pro is 6.000 square kilometers draw radius, "Fast" puffs and disabled cloud shadows (for now, they don't work well with X-Plane's haze, but see for yourself). Get these two add-on's at:  http://www.x-aviation.com  4 . Optional: Maxx FX  Maxx FX is a handy plug-in for X-Plane, it allows to do a final post-processing pass on the image X-Plane sends to your monitor or TV, allowing you to calibrate X-Plane for your display device. This is highly recommended if you want your X-Plane to look just like it does in the official screenshots of Ventura Sky. A "Ventura Sky" preset is available in the downloads section. Get Maxx FX at:  http://www.x-aviation.com  5 . X-Plane 10.50  Guess what, you'll need this, too.  http://www.x-plane.com
What we do that benefits you  If you want to find out about organic or natural cosmetics that you can trust, then you're in the right place. We have created these standards over many years of careful development to represent the best that can be achieved for you, and for the environment. They are progressive, meaning that as innovation, more organic production and green technology allows, we can progress the standard to reflect this.  What the COSMOS-standard covers  The standard divides the type of ingredients used in cosmetic products into five categories and specifies the requirements for each. Here they are with some of the key standards:  Physically processed agro-ingredients – may be plant, animal or microbial origin but no GMOs, no critically endangered species, only products of (not a part of) animals; Chemically processed agro-ingredients – same as above, and the chemical treatments must respect the principles of Green Chemistry with the resulting ingredients complying with strict limitations of toxicity and biodegradability; Water – must comply with hygienic standards; Minerals and ingredients of mineral origin – must be of natural origin and may be modified with simple chemical reactions; Other ingredients – a very limited list of preservatives and some other ingredients and petrochemical moieties are temporarily allowed and are reviewed on a regular basis, taking into account availability of acceptable alternatives.  Companies must also ensure their packaging is minimised and is environmentally friendly and they must have an environmental and waste management plan for their factories.  Finally, all the products produced to these standards have to be certified by an independently authorised certification body. This makes sure that the certification body is competent and professional. They will check everything necessary about the product to verify it complies with the standard and is labelled accurately and clearly, so you can have confidence in what you are buying.  What you should look out for on labels  You will find two types of COSMOS labels:  'COSMOS ORGANIC' on products containing the required percentages of organic ingredients;  'COSMOS NATURAL' on those that comply with the Standard in all other respects but do not have the minimum organic percentages.  'COSMOS ORGANIC' or 'COSMOS NATURAL' will always appear right below the logo/mark of the responsible certifier or association, so you will be able to recognise your already known and trusted organisation that participates in the COSMOS-standard.  In addition, you will find on the label the percentage of organic ingredients in the product. This is the per cent organic of the whole product, but as some products contain a lot of water and mineral ingredients that can never be organic, you may also see the per cent of organic less these two ingredient categories.  Finally, there are requirements for how the company describes itself and its products to make sure any associated literature and claims are accurate and not misleading.  How you can get involved  There are several ways you can get involved.  First, the COSMOS-standard AISBL is a membership organisation.  Second, we have created this standard to safeguard you and your interests as well as the environment. We like to hear your views – what is important to you, what you think the Standard should cover that it doesn't at the moment, or how it should develop further.  Lastly, we rely on you to report problems. Despite the rigorous certification process, there is nothing like the eyes and ears of consumers 'on the ground'. You are buying and using products and you are best placed to see where the Standard is being abused or where consumers are being misled. Please let us know if you find anything wrong or suspicious.  How to report a complaint if you have one  If you do find a problem or are suspicious about a product in any way, please report it through the info@cosmos-standard.org email or use the contact us link. In order for us to make a full investigation and take any necessary action, it is vital you provide the following details:  Your name and contact details (these will be kept confidential but we may need to contact you for more information)  The full name of the product you are complaining about  The company that produces it and their certification  Where and when you saw or purchased the product  The details of your complaint, the problem you have found – please be as specific as you can.  Useful links
Photos  You've seen them on TV. They're the better—and often the better-looking—halves of the PGA Tour stars you like to follow. Now here's your chance to get to know these wives and girlfriends (WAGs) better.  RELATED: The Year In Golf WAGs
"Do you ever yell?" Dr. Ben Carson, the GOP presidential candidate who became the first surgeon ever to successfully separate conjoined twins at the head—and who once separated conjoined twins played by Matt Damon and Greg Kinnear in the film Stuck on You—decided on Tuesday morning to take his newfound political acumen to The View, braving the ladies' hot seat. And things started off easy. No, Carson doesn't yell anymore. He used to, you see, before his come-to-Jesus moment. Now, he speaks in a muted whisper, because that's what Jesus would do.  After hawking his new book America the Beautiful, the co-hosts grilled Carson on the handful of bizarre comments he's made in recent weeks along the campaign trail. First, the comment he made comparing the leftist Obama administration to… the second coming of Hitler's Third Reich. "If people don't speak up for what they believe, then other people will change things without them having a voice. Hitler changed things there and nobody protested. Nobody provided any opposition to him." Naturally, co-host Joy Behar took Carson to task for the Hitler comparison, causing the candidate for the highest office in the land to look visibly shaken and uncomfortable. Heck, he even raised his voice!"Now, what I was saying about the Hitler comment—and I purposely said that because I knew the left-wing would go crazy with 'he said Hitler!'" exclaimed Carson. "So what I said is most of the people in Nazi Germany did not believe in what Hitler was doing, but did they speak up? No. They kept their mouths shut. And when you do that, you're compromising your freedom and the freedom of people that come behind you. You have to be willing to stand up for what you believe in."  Cue Behar. "But… Hitler won the election in Germany," she said. "He won the election." But Carson couldn't be bothered with these pesky little things called "facts," so he vaguely replied, "It doesn't matter what he did. We know he's an evil man."  Co-host Michelle Collins eventually switched topics to the recent mass shooting at Umpqua Community College in Oregon that left nine innocent people dead at the hands of a heavily-armed gunman. Carson recently said of the shooting, "If the teacher was trained in the use of that weapon and had access to it, I would be much more comfortable if they had one than if they didn't"—in other words, Carson was advocating arming kindergarten teachers, because Miss Lippy from Billy Madison packing serious heat is a great idea.Carson backpedaled a bit when it came to having strapped-up coloring book connoisseurs. "Not all kindergarten teachers. I said people who are trained and understand all the implications," he said. "And you're obviously not just going to have a weapon sitting on the kindergarten teacher's desk. It would be secured in a place where kids could not get to it." Then Behar, who apparently has not seen the movie Kindergarten Cop as many times as Carson, furrowed her brow, and replied, "So, if a gunman comes in with an AK-47 or an AR-15, how fast can that teacher go to the locked drawer and get that gun?" "Well, I want that teacher trained in diversionary tactics and whatever needs to be done in order to get there, and I want there to be other people in that school who also know how to get there," Carson replied.  Yes, if kindergarten teachers didn't have it bad enough, Carson is advocating that they now be trained in "diversionary tactics," like… Arnold Schwarzenegger's Det. John "I'm a cop, you idiot!" Kimble.  The next topic was evolution—something that Ben Carson, who by the way holds a medical degree, thinks is the stuff of atheistic fairy tales.  "I've had discussions with Nobel laureates on this, and they have to admit, 'Well, we don't know everything,'" said Carson about evolution. "Let me explain. First of all, evolution… Microevolution versus macroevolution are two different things. We're talking about natural selection when we're talking about microevolution. I believe, yes, organisms have an ability to adapt to their environment, and they have the ability to change. Now, the evolutionists say that that's proof positive of evolution. I say it's proof positive of an intelligent Creator who gave his creatures the ability to adapt to the environment so that they don't have to start over every 50 years."Every 50 years? Whatever.  Finally, the moment we've all been waiting for: Whoopi Goldberg vs. Ben Carson.  Goldberg quizzed Carson on why he doesn't believe there's a "war on women," but instead feels that there's a "war inside of women.""Yeah. The babies. I mean, we're
More like crepes, I came across this recipe one day at work while paging through an older issue of Food & Wine magazine on my lunch break. After having an amazing marzipan pudding made with semolina in Berlin (a recipe that will hopefully be up here soon), I've been obsessed with the idea of semolina. More specifically, the idea of semolina in places you wouldn't normally find it (i.e. outside the homemade pasta world). Luckily, this recipe was almost accidentally vegan!  Originating in Marrakech, crepes may not sound that interesting (okay, maybe that's a lie), but these are A-MAZING. The semolina gives it a really amazing texture, or rather, "mouthfeel" if you will (teehee). Without the eggs, vegan crepes and pancakes tend to be a bit flatter, but these are perfect in my opinion. In fact, I was so enamored with these after my first bite that I immediately went on Skype and gushed about how delicious they were, mouth full of food, for about 30 minutes. If you need more evidence, I finished the entire batter myself within 2 days.  What's unique about these is that they have yeast. Thus, while cooking they get these little holes, which you can see in the picture below. Thus, it's almost like a flat crumpet. Perfect for catching fillings if you ask me!  You only cook them on one side and after making the batter, it's a pretty simple ordeal. Yeah, you have to let the batter rise for an hour, but whatever, perfect time to do the dishes and check your e-mail! The recipe calls for mixing in a food processor and I'm not sure if it's really necessary. The semolina is already in flour form, so perhaps the only point is to break up lumps. I haven't tried it without the processor yet though, so if you do, chime in and let me know how it turns out! I'm sure a blender would work equally as well for this, as the batter is very liquidy.  Without further ado, on to the best breakfast of your life. Although, I'm sure these would also transition well into a savory crepe/pancake or a tasty dessert…  Print Beghrir (Semolina Pancakes) Ingredients 3 cups warm water  2 teaspoons baking powder  1 3/4 cups fine semolina (sometimes called extra-fancy durum flour)  1/3 cup all-purpose flour  2 teaspoons active dry yeast  1 teaspoon sugar  1 teaspoon salt  canola/vegetable oil, for cooking   For the topping 1/3 cup sweet syrup of your choice (i.e. agave, maple, honey if you eat it)  6 tablespoons Earth Balance magarine, melted Instructions In a bowl, combine 1/4 of the warm water with the baking powder and set aside. In your food processor/blender, throw in the semolina flour, all-purpose flour, yeast, sugar and the remaining cups 2 3/4 cups of warm water. Yes, I was freaked out by food processing yeast too, don't worry. Process about 30 seconds until smooth. Add the salt and baking powder mixture and process another 30 seconds. Pour the batter into a large bowl, cover with a dish towel and let rise at room temperature until doubled in size, about an hour. Heat a non-stick frying pan and coat with a thin layer of oil. You want a pan about 10 inches, though this depends on how big you want your pancakes. If you want them smaller, use a smaller pan, etc. While the pan is heating up combine the syrup with the melted butter. You can do this in a small saucepan over low heat if you need. If cooking for someone whose soy-free, make sure to get the soy-free variety of Earth Balance (duh). After the batter has finished rising, whisk it until creamy. Ladle 1/3 cup of the batter into the hot pan, tilting the pan to distribute it evenly. I found it's better to lift the pan up off the heat for this part so it doesn't cook immediately and make it hard to distribute into a big circle. Your first one will probably come out misshapen, but it will still taste good! Cook the batter over medium heat until bubbles appear all over the surface and the bottom is pale golden, about 2 minutes. Shake the skillet to loosen the pancake, or in my case, slide something under the edge of the pancake to loosen it, then slide it onto a plate. Drizzle with your syrup-butter mixture and serve right away. Repeat with the rest of the batter! Notes adapted from Food & Wine magazine 3.1 https://vegannomnoms.net/2011/03/beghrir-semolina
Chris Fox, CP24.com   Coun. Doug Ford says the Ontario PC party needs an "enema" and he isn't counting out running for the leadership himself to make sure it gets one.  Ford made the comment to CP24 on Friday afternoon, less than 12 hours after Kathleen Wynne led the Liberals to an improbable majority government and PC Leader Tim Hudak announced he'd step aside in the wake of the defeat.  "That whole party needs an enema from one end to another and I am not too sure if I am going to get the power washer out (myself) but we will see what happens," he said. "I am not counting it out."  Ford has previously expressed a desire to run for the PC party provincially, but in February he told reporters that he would forgo trying to run in the upcoming election so he could focus on managing his brother's re-election campaign.  Now with the provincial Tories licking their wounds from what was a sound defeat, the outgoing Etobicoke-North councillor admits the "door is open" towards him running for the leadership of the party, though he says his main priority is still Toronto.  "The door is always open in politics but again my priority is to make sure we focus on the city here because Toronto is the engine of Ontario," he said.  Ford says Tories must patch up relationship with unions  Despite holding a lead in many early polls, Tim Hudak and the Tories finished on the outside looking in Thursday night with 27 seats to the Liberals 59.  Discussing the result with reporters at city hall earlier in the day, Ford blamed the party's promise to eliminate 100,000 public sector jobs for the defeat and suggested that the Tories would need to rebuild their relationship with unions going forward if they are to eventually form a government.  "I have said it over and over again. Union members are fiscal conservatives. They don't like seeing government waste money. You just don't go after the unions. It's very simple," Ford said. "Unfortunately I guess my message didn't get through to the PC party."  @chrisfoxnews is on Twitter. Remember for instant breaking news follow @cp24 on Twitter.
Corbynistas have threatened to deselect Jess Phillips after Kezia Dugdale quit as Scottish Labour leader amid claims she was 'hounded out by JC's mob'.  Ms Phillips became the latest Labour MP to be targeted by the hard-left after she spoke out against the attitudes of some British-Pakistanis in the wake of the grooming scandals.  She criticised families for 'going and getting a wife from abroad' for their disabled sons because he 'deserves' to have one.  But the comments have sparked anger among some hard-left supporters of the Labour leader who described her as a 'Zionist' and threatened her with deselection.  The attack surfaced online last night around the same time as Ms Dugdale quit her post saying it is time to 'pass the baton' to someone else.  Nadeem Ahmed, who describes himself as a Corbyn and Momentum supporter, demanded that Ms Philips takes back the comments or face a putsch to kick her out.  He wrote on Twitter: 'Jess Phillips remarks on British Pakistani's she has till 10pm to apologise, or I will start deselection process. Momentum is powerful force.'  Momentum activists have demanded the deselection of Labour MP Jess Phillips after she spoke out against some British Pakistani families' attitudes to women in the wake of the grooming scandals. Corbynistas rounded on her as news broke that Scottish Labour leader Kezia Dugdale quit amid claims she had been hounded out by 'JC's mob'  Corbynistas took to Twitter to demand Ms Phillips is booted out of office. One posted an offensive leaflet online branding her a 'Zionist'  Jess Phillips has defended her comments online and hit out at the 'bullies' attacking her  His message was quickly seized upon by the Corbynista account going by the name @MontyBestUK who also demanded her deselection.  The account posted a leaflet posted online branding the Labour MP for Birmingham Yardley a 'Zionist' and calling for her to be kicked out.  Ms Phillips has defended her comments online and hit out at the 'bullies' attacking her.  Many female Labour MPs have spoken out against the constant stream of abuse and threats of deselection they have received from some of Mr Corbyn's supporters.  Labour MP Sarah Champion quit as Women and Equalities minister in the Labour shadow cabinet after she sparked a storm of criticism for saying 'Britain has a problem with British Pakistani men raping and exploiting white girls'.  She made the intervention after 18 people were convicted in the Newcastle grooming case - the latest in a string of similar scandals stretching back to Rotherham.  Ms Dugdale shocked the political establishment last night when she announced she is quitting.  She had faced heavy criticism from the left wing of her own party after attacking Mr Corbyn.  She fell foul of his supporters after giving her backing to leadership challenger Owen Smith in last summer's contest - accusing the firebrand socialist of speaking 'only to the converted'.  A senior source is said to have revealed today to Buzzfeed that Ms Dugdale was 'hounded out by JC's mob'.  Scottish Labour suffered major losses in last year's Scottish Parliament election with 13 of its seats going to other parties.  It slipped to an embarrassing third place in the polls leading Ms Dugdale to admit that she had seen first-hand what happens to a party that 'repeatedly refuses to listen to the message the electorate is saying'.  Kezia Dugdale, pictured right, last month revealed she is in a relationship with SNP politician Jenny Gilruth, pictured left. last night she announced she is quitting as Scottish Labour leader  The politician, pictured right, had faced heavy criticism from the left wing of her own party after attacking UK leader Jeremy Corbyn, pictured left  But she insisted she had left the party in a better state than she had found it when she took over as leader in August 2015.  Ms Dugdale said she wanted to give the 'space and time' to prepare for the next Scottish Parliament election in 2021.  The death of her close friend Gordon Aikman - a Motor Neurone Disease campaigner - had also led her rethink her priorities, she said.  In a statement she said: 'As chair of the party, I am writing to you today to resign as leader of the Scottish Labour Party.  'It has been an honour and a privilege to have served this party in a leadership position for the last two and a half years, covering four national elections and one referendum.  Ms Dugdale, pictured left, also said the death of her close friend Gordon Aikman, pictured right - a Motor Neurone Disease campaigner - had led her rethink her priorities  'I have worked with many great people, not least the staff in our HQ led by Brian Roy and those in the Scottish Parliament, whose boundless energy
The NCAA on Friday suspended Syracuse basketball coach Jim Boeheim for nine ACC games, took away 12 scholarships, and ordered that 108 wins be vacated as a result of a multiyear investigation into the university's athletic programs.  "Over the course of a decade, Syracuse University did not control and monitor its athletics programs," the NCAA said in a statement, "and its head men's basketball coach failed to monitor his program."  Syracuse's penalties also include a five-year probation and the vacating of all wins in which ineligible men's basketball student-athletes played during the 2004-07 and 2010-12 seasons, and in which ineligible football student-athletes played in 2004, 2005 and 2006.  In addition, the NCAA agreed to accept the university's decision for the men's basketball team not to participate in any postseason games this season, including the ACC tournament.  The NCAA said that the violations, which were self-reported by Syracuse and dated back to 2001, included academic misconduct, extra benefits, failure to follow the drug-testing policy and impermissible booster activity.  Other violations included impermissible academic assistance and services, Boeheim's failure to promote an atmosphere of compliance and monitor his staff, and the school's lack of control over its athletics program.  "Initially, I would like to express relief that the NCAA's unparalleled 8-year investigation of the University and the Men's Basketball Program is finally over," Boeheim said in a statement. "As I expressed at the Committee on Infractions Hearing, I acknowledge that violations occurred within the Men's Basketball Program, and as the Head Coach of the Program, I take those violations very seriously.  "That being said, I am disappointed with many of the findings and conclusions as stated in the Infractions Report. The Committee chose to ignore the efforts which I have undertaken over the past 37 years to promote an atmosphere of compliance within the Men's Basketball Program. Instead they chose to focus on the rogue and secretive actions of a former employee of the local YMCA and my former Director of Basketball Operations in order to impose an unprecedented series of penalties upon the University and the Men's Basketball Program."  The basketball program must vacate 108 wins -- the most ever taken away from a program, according to Syracuse.com. As a result, Boeheim -- who had needed only 34 wins to join Duke's Mike Krzyzewski in the 1,000-win club -- is left with 858, which drops him to sixth on the all-time list.  Boeheim must sit out the first nine ACC games of the 2015-16 season. He plans to appeal his suspension, a source with direct knowledge of the situation told ESPN's Andy Katz.  Recruiting restrictions also will be enforced for two years.  "Improper institutional involvement and influence in a student's academic work in order to gain or maintain eligibility is a violation of NCAA rules and a violation of the most fundamental core values of the NCAA and higher education," the NCAA's committee on infractions wrote in its decision. "The behavior in this case, which placed the desire to achieve success on the basketball court over academic integrity, demonstrated clearly misplaced institutional priorities."  The NCAA suspended Syracuse coach Jim Boeheim for nine ACC games, saying he failed to "promote an atmosphere of compliance and monitor his staff." Brett Carlsen/Getty Images  Syracuse chancellor Kent Syverud said the university is considering appealing portions of the decision.  "Although the university recognizes the seriousness of the violations it has acknowledged, it respectfully disagrees with certain findings of the Committee," Syverud said in a statement. "Specifically, the university strongly disagrees that it failed to maintain institutional control over its athletics programs, or that men's basketball head coach Jim Boeheim has taken actions that justify a finding that he was responsible for the rules violations."  The Division I appeals committee is made up of five members who would hear the appeal of Boeheim's nine-game suspension and any other appeals Syracuse decides to make.  The committee's schedule of meetings is not made public, according to the NCAA. The five members are attorney W. Anthony Jenkins of Dickinson Wright PLLC; Vanderbilt athletic director David Williams; Miami (Ohio) faculty athletic rep Susan Lipnickey; Patricia Ohlendorf, Texas VP of institutional relations and legal; and George Washington law professor Jack Friedenthal.  The sanctions do not affect Syracuse's 2003 national championship or that team. The university, however, must reimburse the NCAA for all revenue earned during the NCAA tournaments from 2011 through 2013.  The NCAA finished its investigation into Syracuse athletics in late October 2014. Boeheim and football coach Scott Shafer were among the school officials to appear before the NCAA's committee on infractions.  The school initiated the case, which includes academics, when it self-reported potential athletic department violations to the NCAA in 2007.  Syverud said that the university cooperated with the NCAA
}4 F rid °y' February 27, 1948 $ak*tBffet& (felifarttimt Plan A tentative program for the state convention of the Junior Statesmen of America, to be held at East B'a- kersfleld High School on Friday and Saturday, April 9 and 10, has r been announced by Harlan Mann, sponsor of the local J«S.A« chapter. <k>-chairmen of the event wHlch will draw more than 400 school students from all over California are Lucia Howard and Ron a Drig- LITTLE GIRLS' i , who are in charge of working out the program. One of the big problems facing the local group is adequate housing for the large group of visitors. ^Registration and all sessions of the legislature will be held at East Bakersfield High School auditorium. Eegistration and assignment to homes will take place on Friday, April 9, from 4 until 7 p.m. The first legislative session will be held from 7 :30 to 10 o'clock Friday night Presiding officer at this meeting will be a lieutenant governor in the organization, Edward Begalia of El Cerrito. The legislative sessions will continue throughout the day on Saturday, with convention delegates discussing legislative measures and enacting legislative procedures. A banquet and Governor's Ball will be held Saturday night Chief speakers at the banquet will be J.S.A. Governor John Albright of Glendale, and J. Roger Deas of San Francisco, who is a member of the Junior Statesman Foundation. All members of the local chapter are busy with the many details of the large meeting here. these specials won't most EXCITING youve n time! Save on these Basement •s. '4 City Os Awa e opath onor Dr, A, J* Priestej, local osteopath, lias been appointed Progress Fund chairman for Kern, Tulare, Fresno and San Luis Obispo to serve the California College of Os, teopathic Physicians and Surgeons. Dr. W. Ballentine Henley, president of the college, who spoke here recently at a meeting of the Kern County Osteopathic Society, congratulated the local group upon its appointment. He explained the improvements that have been made in the use of the Progress Fund the past five years. Funds are used to improve the teaching and laboratory facilities at the college, he said. said. . It will be Dr. Prtester's duty to stimulate interest in gifts to the college. Dr. R. W. Johnson introduced the cospeaker of the evening, Dr. Harold W. Carter, president of the alumni association. * Dr. Carter said that alumni gifts made possible the purchase of a specially built 35-mm motion picture camera for use in medical mo- tkm picture photography. A report of the industrial insurance committee was given by Dr. W. G. Hendricks. Pupils Plan § Male i- ve OILDALE—With the smell of spring in the air, the more than ^1300 pupils at Standard School are - eagerly looking forward to a series of springtime events, according to Principal Bryce Hathbun. A kite contest and a marble tour• nament will be the first of the forthcoming events. Dates for the marble tourney had not been set, tnd the kite contest will be held when the March winds come. The kite makers, however, are already busy with their creations. A flower show for boys and girls will be held at the school April 2 to 9, end the annual track meet for boys and girls will be held April 9 through 16. Invitational events with'other schools will be held on the final day. The annual P. T. A. carnival, one of the big events of the school year, has been set for May 7. The Standard P. T. A. has set -aside $100 to purchase prize ribbons for the various spring contests. Visiting Autoists Hurt in Accidents Three visiting motorists were hospitalized here during the past 24 hours 'with injuries received in vehicular mishaps, attaches at Kern General Hospital reported today. Ervin Mansay, 24, Flagstaff, Ariz., was admitted to the hospital, where Ms condition was reported as fairly good. Evelyn Simponis, 32, San Diego, And John Ganattio, 32, San Jose, victims of a non-collision accident, were treated at the Kern General Hospital and transferred to the Bakersfield Hospital. LaSierra School Music Group to Appear Here LaSierra College musical group from Arlington will present a program of song and instrumental music at 7:45 p. HL today at the Seventh-Day Adventist Church, 2001 Traxtun avenue. Dr. G. T. Anderson, president of the college, wilJ be the #nest speaker at Sahbath services at 11 a. m. Saturday. Sorry, No Exchanges, No Refunds, No.
Many footballers have never met anyone who identifies as LGBT, according to one former pro.  Paul Mortimer, a former professional footballer who now works as player engagement manager at equality organisation Kick It Out, spoke to No Nay Never's podcast about tackling homophobia in the sport.  He said: "I speak to a lot of players and say 'have you had any experience or have you been exposed? Have you met anyone that may be lesbian or gay?' A lot haven't – or that's what they say.  "There is very much a playground humour. 'If I'm associated with someone that is gay, what will people think about me?' That kind of childish aspect comes into it.  "What it does when you're in an environment where you know homophobic slurs are the norm, if you are struggling with your sexuality it's going to isolate you."  The podcast comes after Burnley FC player Andre Gray received a four-match ban for homophobic tweets which resurfaced in August, where he said that gay people should "burn and die".  Di Cunningham, from Pride In Football, said: "Burnley is one of a handful of Premier League clubs that doesn't have an officially recognised LGBT fan group.  "We really hope that this is an opportunity for them to do something. They've never been particularly active – as far as I know – in any anti-discrimination activity in terms of homophobic campaigns."  Meanwhile, Burnley FC head of community Neil Hart revealed that the club will be holding an LGBT awareness game to "make people think differently, and more importantly behave differently".  Also speaking were Burnley FC Chief Executive David Baldwin, Robbie de Santos from LGBT charity Stonewall, and two gay football fans Leyton Bracegirdle and Alex Kohnert.  You can listen to the full podcast over at nonaynever.net
India says its interest in Africa is about more than trade – so, its $5bn in aid, almost equal to India's healthcare budget, will help states meet the MDGs  India pledged $5bn in aid to Africa, an amount almost equivalent to its own annual healthcare budget – around $5.9bn – on Wednesday, the last day of the second India-Africa summit at Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. Africa, one of the weakest links in the realisation of the millennium development goals (MDGs), will also have a partner in India for capacity building and expertise sharing over the next three years. The Indian presence will not only enhance commerce and infrastructure but include other key development areas, such as education and training.  This was Africa Day, the day New Delhi pulled out all stops to cement its "historical links" with Africa and, possibly as some critics would argue, to rival China's huge presence on the continent.  "A new vision is required for Africa's development and participation in global affairs," said India's prime minister, Manmohan Singh, before the summit, which opened on Friday. "We do not have all the answers but we have some experience in nation building, which we are happy to share."  The Indian delegation that showed up in Addis Ababa – including the prime minister and trade minister, Anand Sharma – was a clear sign that the South Asian nation considers the continent of Africa to be important, and a major "growth pole".  Apart from development aid, India will spend $700m to build institutions and establish training programmes and $300m to develop the Ethio-Djibouti Railway. In the offing are plans for an India-Africa virtual university and more than 22,000 higher education scholarships for African students. Apart from that, India will contribute $2m to the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).  India has doled out aid and investment in every sphere of Africa's development – from centres of excellence to disaster management – which contrasts with China's $126bn ties that have been largely about commercial and infrastructure investment.  "There's no competition," said Brahma Chellaney, professor of strategic affairs at the Centre for Policy Research in Delhi and an arms control expert. "The Chinese are way ahead and the Indians are not even trying. India is not pushing for corporate ties as they are more interested in government-to-government ties, which is very different from the Chinese diplomacy, which is to push commercial interests upfront."  However, Gurjit Singh, joint secretary at India's foreign ministry, said last year that the key features of India's Africa policy revolve around trade and investment, capacity building and training.  India's focus is on Africa's development, but it is also looking towards fulfilling its growing energy needs from the continent – and gaining support from African states in securing a permanent seat at the UN security council. It has massively increased its oil imports from Africa – mostly Nigeria, Sudan and Angola – as a way of reducing its dependence on Middle Eastern oil. But there are other commercial interests: India's diamond-cutting industry, which is the largest in the world, imports stones from South Africa, Botswana, Namibia and Zimbabwe; and top industrial houses such as Tata and Bharti have invested billions of dollars across the continent, taking advantage of the growing consumer base.  As Sharma, India's trade minister, said: "Economic and development cooperation between India and Africa is a cornerstone of their new age partnership."  Trade ties between India and the continent stand at $46bn a year, which the Delhi delegation wants to take to $70bn by 2015; and Africa-India bilateral investments reached $90bn in 2010. India is the largest foreign investor in Ethiopia, the host country, with investment of $4.78bn. Trade ties between the two countries grew from $83m in 2005-06 to $272m in 2009-10. And Bilateral India-Africa trade grew from $1bn in 2001 to $50bn by 2010.  India and China's involvement in the region is beneficial for all concerned. New Delhi's strategy in Africa will, however, always be more than mere commercial interest. Before leaving for the summit, Singh said the India-Africa partnership rests on the three pillars of "capacity building and skill transfer, trade and infrastructure development". And it is exactly in that order that the relationship will evolve in the coming few years.
A wrapper for using csscomb.js from within emacs. Allows you to comb region/buffers  Install  Install csscomb  You'll need to first install `csscomb` using npm  [sudo] npm install -g csscomb  Install this package  From MELPA  Make sure you have `melpa` added to your package sources  ( add-to-list 'package-archives '( " melpa " . " http://melpa.org/packages/ " ))  Then you can do `M-x package-list-packages` and search for `css-comb`, or you can simply install it with `package-install css-comb`  Manually  Clone this package somewhere on your computer  Add the cloned dir to your load-path  `require(css-comb)` in your init.el  You can now use this package by calling `M-x css-comb`. It'll comb the region if selected or the whole buffer. You should probably add a shortcut for calling `css-comb` in the css-buffers.  (after-load 'css-mode ( define-key css-mode-map ( kbd " C-c C-x c " ) 'css-comb ))  Protip  You should also install web-beautify package. The CSS generated by csscomb.js is horrible, this package utilize web-beautify if present to make it look better. You should use web-beautify anyway, even if you don't use css-comb
" " Are Artificial Sweeteners Really Bad For You? MamaMiaPL/Thinkstock  Artificial sweeteners have gotten a bad rap in the press for as long as they've been in use. But is it just the result of a fear of science or do artificial sweeteners cause real harm? A mounting body of studies is starting to paint a pretty grim picture.
CHENNAI: StayZilla Co-Founder Yogendra Vasupal was today granted bail by the Madras High Court on a condition that he should deposit Rs 40 lakh with the court to establish bonafide intentions.Judge S Baskaran, while granting bail, termed the case as "purely a dispute between two businessmen."Interestingly, the counsellor for Jigsaw had pushed for mediation as a means to settle the issue but Vasupal's counsellors told the court firmly their client was not up for mediation.The money deposit was necessitated after counsellors for Jigsaw raised questions over Vasupal's intentions to settle dues. "They closed StayZilla, which made us apprehensive," the counsellor said. The judge has given Vasupal one week's time for the deposit.A counsellor for Vasupal said the money will not go to the de-facto complainant(Jigsaw) until the case is complete.Jigsaw solutions, an advertising vendor, had lodged a complaint of dues worth Rs 1.69 crore owed by StayZilla for a period between March and May 2016. The company, which had raised $13 million in May, had filed up on February this year, promising a reboot.The police filed a case under Section 420, 406, and 506(I) on March 13 and arrested Vasupal in Chennai on the IT corridor the next day.Vasupal's arrest and the quick action by the police polarised observers, with some claiming the episode is rattling the start-up ecosystem while others saying it is just a one-off incident.Vasupal had posted two blog posts, one making a fervent plea for help and other asserting that he had no intentions to cheat as made out by Jigsaw.
Birmingham, ALABAMA — An organization partnered with a George Soros-financed group and led by a radical leftist who is the half-brother of the infamous controversial Rev. Al Sharpton has been diligently working over the past few weeks to register convicted felons across Alabama.  The aim of the effort has been to get as many felons as possible on the roster before last Monday, the deadline to register in order to vote in Alabama's Dec. 12 senate special election that pits Republican Roy Moore against Democratic challenger Doug Jones. The man spearheading the campaign has stated outright that his effort is meant to ensure a Democratic victory in Alabama.  The thousands of felons reportedly newly registered over the past few weeks were most likely not included in any recent polling on the Alabama senate race put out by major firms.  Jones himself is tied to some of the specific organizations associated with the drive to register felons here. Indeed, as Breitbart News first reported, Jones spearheaded a project for a massively Soros-financed legal activist group demanding full voting rights be given to felons released from prison, including those convicted of murder, rape and other violent crimes.  AL.com reported that Pastor Kenneth Glasgow has been at the forefront of the statewide effort, which has successfully registered thousands of felons across Alabama in recent weeks. Glasgow has been aided in his efforts here by other Soros-financed groups, including the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU).  The Village Voice previously described Glasgow, Sharpton's half-brother, as an "ex-con and recovering crackhead turned street preacher."  Glasgow is currently president of a group he founded in 1999 calling itself The Ordinary People Society (TOPS). And he is a former leader of another organization, the radical Free Alabama Movement (FAM), which has for years been making inroads into Alabama's prison population.  Glasgow told AL.com that in the last month alone "I think we registered at least five- to ten-thousand people all over the state" – referring to his efforts here in Alabama.  "I've got people all over the state registering people with my TOPS branches in Tuscaloosa, Birmingham, Montgomery, Enterprise, Dothan, Abbeville, Geneva, Gordon, Bessemer, we have a lot," he added.  Speaking on his radio program, Glasgow charged that "swarming the polls" with newly registered convicts could swing the vote, pointing as a template to the Virginia governor's race. In that state, Gov. Terry McAuliffe used his executive power in April to restore voting rights for over 200,000 felons.  "We have the chance to do the same thing they did in Virginia," Glasgow stated. "We can turn it blue. Well not blue, but we can add some color. Make it pink or purple."  Glasgow has been taking advantage of a change made last May, when Alabama's Gov. Kay Ivey signed a law that defined a clause in the State constitution denying the right to vote to anyone who has committed a crime that demonstrates "moral turpitude."  The new law generated a list of about 50 crimes that fit under the "moral turpitude" banner, including murder, kidnapping and sexual abuse. Glasgow was involved in the activism promoting the law.  This means that Glasgow is free to register felons whose crimes do not fit under the state's definition of a "moral turpitude" conviction.  Glasgow's activism is intended to fill the void left by Alabama's legal refusal to actively notify potentially tens of thousands of former felons that they regained their voting rights. A federal judge in July sided with Alabama, affirming that the state does not need to make such notifications after Ivey signed the law restoring rights to some felons.  A Soros-funded group called the Campaign Legal Center filed the lawsuit against Alabama last year calling for a public educational campaign to inform felons of their regained right to vote. The litigation is still ongoing.  "This is not a Democratic or Republican issue; it's a democracy issue with a lower case d," Danielle Lang, a Campaign Legal Center lawyer, stated after spending a week earlier this month in Alabama holding educational clinics on the matter.  Besides funding from Soros, the Campaign Legal Center documents that it receives financing from the Soros-funded Tides Foundation and from the Soros-funded Brennan Center for Justice.  Doug Jones himself has spearheaded numerous Brennan projects, including one seeking full voting rights nationwide be given to all felons released from prison regardless of their crimes.  The Brennan Center has been the recipient of numerous grants from Soros's Open Society Foundations totaling over $7,466,000 from 2000 to 2010 alone.  The Soros-funded ACLU of Alabama also filed a lawsuit seeking to force the state of Alabama to inform convicted felons that they can vote.  The ACLU has also worked with Glasgow's TOPS to register