Question: Is an advance care planning model feasible in community palliative care? Answer: This study, funded by the CRUK in 2014 and led by Dan Blakeman, explored the feasibility of an advance care planning (ACP) model in community palliative care. They found that ACP was feasible and acceptable,
Question: Is coeliac disease screening in risk groups justified? Answer: Yes. Read on for details and an offer of a free book!
Question: Does blood pressure change in treated hypertensive patients depending on whether it is measured by a physician or a nurse? Answer: It does not. What if the accuracy of the measurement is suspect, or the methods by which it is taken are inappropriate? What if the method for reducing blood pressure is inappropriate or incorrect? In each case, to assume that what is being measured is blood pressure is incorrect. Note: The issue is not what constitutes the “gold standard” of
Question: Metastatic carcinoma to the cervical nodes from an unknown head and neck primary site: Is there a need for neck dissection? Answer: No, but other factors should be included in the decision making process. (Level of Evidence: 1A) The role of neck dissection after therapy for metastatic carcinoma of unknown primary is controversial. Surgery is generally not required for carcinoma of the oropharynx and base of tongue because prognosis is usually very good. Surgical Therapy
Question: Estimation of basal metabolic rate in Chinese: are the current prediction equations applicable? Answer: Observational studies suggest that the relationships between body weight and height are not constant across populations and that a correction for differences in body build is needed in the prediction of
Question: Recovery Outcome Measures: Is There a Place for Culture, Attitudes, and Faith? Answer: Affirmative [Issue] Background: Faith is usually described as a belief in a higher power, a belief that supports the view that recovery is
Question: Thoracic and thoracoabdominal aneurysm repair: is reimplantation of spinal cord arteries a waste of time? Answer: Evidence supporting the addition of spinal cord artery reimplantation is sparse and must be balanced with the morbidity and mortality risk of reimplantation. Level of Evidence: 5 View summary TOP
Question: Are sports medicine journals relevant and applicable to practitioners and athletes? Answer: Yes, they are relevant and applicable for both. All of the most important sports medicine research (clinical and basic science) is published in such journals. Many have good coverage of rehabilitation, sports
Question: Transient tachypnea of the newborn (TTN): a role for polymorphisms in the beta-adrenergic receptor (ADRB) encoding genes? Answer: Most studies suggest that polymorphisms in the ADRB2 (Arg16Gly), ADRB3 (Gln27Glu), and ADRB1 (Pro12Ala) genes are related to risk
Question: Hepatorenal syndrome: are we missing some prognostic factors? Answer: yes. Read about prognostic factors for hepatorenal syndrome (formerly known as acute kidney injury (AKI) due to liver disease). The prognosis of hepatorenal syndrome is not good and hence care should be taken to identify the prognostic factors and improve the outcome.
Question: Does glomerular hyperfiltration in pregnancy damage the kidney in women with more parities? Answer: Yes Comment: increased blood pressure and glycerine levels cause damage to the glomerulus, decreased glomerular filtration.
Question: Is high-sensitivity C-reactive protein associated with carotid atherosclerosis in healthy Koreans? Answer: Kim YK, Kim YS, Park YK, Lee IK. High-sensitivity C-reactive protein and carotid atherosclerosis in healthy middle-aged Korean men. Atherosclerosis 2013;228(2):399–403. Study Type: Prospective, Epidemiologic (association) study Sample Size: 807 Inclusion
Question: Does cup-cage reconstruction with oversized cups provide initial stability in THA for osteoporotic acetabular fractures? Answer: Yes*
Question: Are opioid dependence and methadone maintenance treatment (MMT) documented in the medical record? Answer: Yes (American Academy of Addiction Psychiatry 2014).
Question: Do symptoms matter when considering patients for phase I clinical trials? Answer: Yes. All side effects must be recorded, especially those that might be significant, as
Question: Is expert breast pathology assessment necessary for the management of ductal carcinoma in situ? Answer: No. Meaning: Use conventional screening mammography to screen for DCIS. Guideline AUA guideline on DCIS Management Answer The AUA
Question: Is endometrial polyp formation associated with increased expression of vascular endothelial growth factor and transforming growth factor-beta1? Answer: N/A
Question: Preparing patients at high risk of falls for discharge home after rehabilitation: Do we meet the guidelines? Answer: No.
Question: Could the extent of lymphadenectomy be modified by neoadjuvant chemotherapy in cervical cancer? Answer: We searched for trials (not randomized controlled) that reported perioperative complications, hospital stay, and 30-day morbidity for radical hysterectomy and radical hysterectomy with adjuvant radiotherapy or chemotherapy. Overall, 26 studies including 8880 patients were reviewed. Most studies were rated as
Question: Does the lipid-lowering peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors ligand bezafibrate prevent colon cancer in patients with coronary artery disease? Answer: The role of PPAR agonists (e.g. bezafibrate) as colon cancer chemopreventive agents has been assessed in two case-control studies. Bezafibrate did not appear to alter
Question: Does head positioning influence anterior chamber depth in pseudoexfoliation syndrome? Answer: Hisashi Tanaka, MD. Acta Ophthalmol 2011; 89:124 No randomized clinical trials or prospective comparative studies have been conducted to determine which intraocular pressure (IOP)-lowering agent is best in treating pseudoxfoliation syndrome (PXF) or idiopathic hypertensive PXF. However, if IOP-lowering agents are to be used to treat PXF, one should focus on minimizing the risk of complications, especially cataract formation. For
Question: Does case-mix based reimbursement stimulate the development of process-oriented care delivery? Answer: That is unclear. Case-mix based reimbursement systems have been in place in Germany and England for many years. Thus far, however, case-mix development has not resulted in major changes in hospital and medical professional organization. However, in England there has been a recent spate of mergers between private hospitals and acute hospitals.
Question: Does sex influence the response to intravenous thrombolysis in ischemic stroke? Answer: Although historically lower rates of intravenous thrombolysis were reported among men, the data do not support sex as a factor in sex-based differences in response to intravenous thrombolysis in acute ischemic stroke.
Question: 30-Day and 1-year mortality in emergency general surgery laparotomies: an area of concern and need for improvement? Answer: Mortality and morbidity should always be viewed in the context of the year and the location. ... Q-30 Practice Q-3-0 Q-30: What is the single most important factor contributing to mortality in trauma patients, no matter what the cause of death? Answer: The single most important factor is the mechanism of injury. ... Q-30 Practice Q-3-0 Q-30: If you are unable to be the one-year-follow-up for a patient you just operated on, who is the responsible person? Answer: It should be the person who treated the patient in the hospital. ... Q-30
Question: Can computerised tomography replace bone scintigraphy in detecting bone metastases from breast cancer? Answer: It seems like the x-ray CT scan is the most common procedure used in diagnosing bone metastases from breast cancer. Bone
Question: Diffusion-weighted echo-planar MR imaging of primary parotid gland tumors: is a prediction of different histologic subtypes possible? Answer: From: Dvorak M, Wehling M, Gschwendtner S, Straub N. Heterogeneous tissue composition and enhanced permeability in high-grade salivary gland tumors detected by diffusion-weighted MR imaging. Radiology 2000; 215:459-463. "To confirm the extent to which results from histology samples can be extrapolated to the entire primary tumor volume, the average values of the six parameters per tumor case were compared to the
Question: Is cholecystectomy really an indication for concomitant splenectomy in mild hereditary spherocytosis? Answer: … A patient with mild hereditary spherocytosis and symptomatic cholelithiasis may require cholecystectomy. The presence of a splenic infarct and a congested spleen upon laparoscopic cholecystectomy may warrant splenectomy. If the diagnosis of mild hereditary spherocytosis is not suspected and
Question: Does menopausal transition affect the quality of life? Answer: No answer found Answer: No answer found
Question: Is aneurysm repair justified for the patients aged 80 or older after aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage? Answer: No Recommendation: See comments. Evidence Summary: Only one small study included patients aged 80 or older. The inclusion of old patients did not change the impact of aneurysm repair on short-term morbidity or mortality. The 3-month mortality rate after
Question: Sternal fracture in growing children : A rare and often overlooked fracture? Answer: Rare and often overlooked osteogenic fracture involving the manubrium and body. Only six children have been reported since 1941. Treatment usually involves removal of impacted fragments through a posterolateral approach. There is a high rate of complications.
Question: Emergency double-balloon enteroscopy combined with real-time viewing of capsule endoscopy: a feasible combined approach in acute overt-obscure gastrointestinal bleeding? Answer: Positive Association Between Oxycodone Consumption and Poisonings Among Children and Adolescents Authors: Takahashi M, Inoue H, Baba A, et al. Journal: Pediatrics 132(6) Link: http://www.pediatrics.org/cgi/content/abstract/132/6/e1252 Summary: Background Case Report: Oxycodone poisoning is associated with accidental and intentional ingestion in children and adolescents. Because oxycodone is a schedule II controlled substance, it is kept
Question: Are physicians meeting the needs of family caregivers of the frail elderly? Answer: Not completely. According to a survey published in the September 18, 2000 issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association, 49% of doctors agree that they have the necessary information to provide effective care for family caregivers. A further survey in the July 2001 issue of the same journal,
Question: Pap smears with glandular cell abnormalities: Are they detected by rapid prescreening? Answer: No. A number of these cases have been shown to not have cancer. Conclusion: The accuracy of rapid testing can be as low as 30% to 40% and is considerably lower than that for traditional cytology.
Question: Does airway surgery lower serum lipid levels in obstructive sleep apnea patients? Answer: Yes Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a sleep-related breathing disorder, characterized by repeated episodes of complete or partial upper airway obstruction. Recent studies have shown that weight gain occurs in a high proportion of patients with OSA, especially among those
Question: Is withdrawal-induced anxiety in alcoholism based on beta-endorphin deficiency? Answer: Possibly. (Lawrence and Littrell, 1992) D. Alcohol withdrawal in the rat results in long-lasting behavioral and neurochemical changes (Gold, 1983;Gold et al., 1984) These
Question: Is there any relation between cervical cord plaques and discopathy in patients with multiple sclerosis? Answer: There is no link between cervical cord plaques and discopathy. Marked cervical cord plaques
Question: Aromatase inhibitor-related musculoskeletal symptoms: is preventing osteoporosis the key to eliminating these symptoms? Answer: Many medical practitioners believe that although aromatase inhibitor-related musculoskeletal symptoms are bothersome, they are insignificant and just a normal part of aging. A more logical approach is to offer patients the benefits of preventing osteoporosis. Some patients find the following information to be useful in making their own decision about preventing the rapid decline in bone mass and bone density as part of hormone therapy for breast cancer. Estrogen and osteoporosis Estrogen is believed
Question: Can D-dimer become a new diagnostic parameter for acute appendicitis? Answer: No, D-dimer as a diagnostic parameter for acute appendicitis is not feasible. The increased D-dimer concentrations
Question: Does automatic transmission improve driving behavior in older drivers? Answer: This study suggests that automatic transmission in older drivers does not improve driving behavior compared with manual transmission. Source: Keim, R.M., and Kline, J.A. (1994).
Question: Should HIV-infected patients be screened for silent myocardial ischaemia using gated myocardial perfusion SPECT? Answer: No
Question: Does a preoperative medically supervised weight loss program improve bariatric surgery outcomes? Answer: Yes The Evidence: The Cochrane database identifies 16 eligible randomized controlled trials examining the effectiveness of preoperative weight loss programs and concludes there is “inconclusive evidence of an effect of weight loss programmes
Question: Do Indigenous Australians age prematurely? Answer: Yes, but, as shown by Liddle et al. , recent declines in Indigenous Australian mortality have narrowed the gap with non-Indigenous mortality in recent years. [Note: Use the link above to read about Liddle and colleagues’ article. You will need to sign in with your library card and password to access it.]
Question: Do French lay people and health professionals find it acceptable to breach confidentiality to protect a patient's wife from a sexually transmitted disease? Answer: Not for long, perhaps, but certainly right now.
Question: Fragility of the esophageal mucosa: a pathognomonic endoscopic sign of primary eosinophilic esophagitis? Answer: Not yet. Ref: Elliott C, et al. Am J Gastroenterol 2009;104(10):2536-2544
Question: Are stroke patients' reports of home blood pressure readings reliable? Answer: Blood pressure measurements at home may be more accurate than those taken at the doctor's office. An alert Q: What should I do if I wake up in the middle of the night with severe chest pain? Dr. Colin Cannon, University Hospital, Birmingham, Ala. A: Any severe pain in the chest, whether at rest or on movement, is potentially a sign
Question: Is the first urinary albumin/creatinine ratio (ACR) in women with suspected preeclampsia a prognostic factor for maternal and neonatal adverse outcome? Answer: This question was addressed in a Cochrane review of 18 studies and seven cohort studies involving 24,182 women with suspected preeclampsia. The review concluded that the first
Question: A model of healing of Los Angeles grades C and D reflux oesophagitis: is there an optimal time of acid suppression for maximal healing? Answer: In randomized controlled trials, long-term acid suppression is associated with maximal healing. Questions: Are the patients who have reflux symptoms despite long-term use of acid-suppressing drugs going to respond better to acid suppression? or are they are
Question: Is the ability to perform transurethral resection of the prostate influenced by the surgeon's previous experience? Answer: No. Conclusion: Long-term outcome after transurethral resection of the prostate is independent of the number of procedures performed by the surgeon in the past. The increase in procedure volume does not reduce mortality but is associated with an increased risk of complications and does not influence the urethral continence rate. So just because you have to do
Question: Cervical spine fractures in geriatric blunt trauma patients with low-energy mechanism: are clinical predictors adequate? Answer: Yes, predictive value was better for posterior column fractures than for anterior column fractures. Comment: Posterior column fracture
Question: Can APC mutation analysis contribute to therapeutic decisions in familial adenomatous polyposis? Answer: APC mutation analysis is an important part of the workup of individuals who have familial adenomatous polyposis. The role of APC mutation analysis in predicting clinical behavior is not entirely clear; however, patients who have mutations that are associated with a positive family history or noncanonical splice sites (1539 and exon 15) do have more advanced disease. Of note, homozygosity for
Question: Does a geriatric oncology consultation modify the cancer treatment plan for elderly patients? Answer: Geriatric consultation in oncology may change the cancer treatment plan for elderly patients by allowing for early or palliative care. Abstract Article see p 729 Aims/hypothesis Age is a known modifiable risk factor for cancer mortality, the majority of which
Question: CYP2D6*4 allele and breast cancer risk: is there any association? Answer: This is a retrospective study by one group in France. They tried to collect data from the French
Question: Does obstructive sleep apnea affect aerobic fitness? Answer: No, it doesn’t. However, there may be an indirect effect. In obstructive sleep apnea, breathing is sometimes so obstructed that blood oxygen levels fall. As oxygen drops, heart rate rises, and blood pressure rises, too. Because blood vessels constrict to keep blood pressure normal, the heart pumps harder to get more blood out to the body, with less pressure in the blood vessels. The result? The heart’s
Question: Does loss of consciousness predict neuropsychological decrements after concussion? Answer: yes, loss of consciousness is associated with more severe neurocognitive deficits
Question: Does early migraine treatment shorten time to headache peak and reduce its severity? Answer: No Study Design: Double blind placebo controlled trial Objective: To evaluate whether early administration of sumatriptan will reduce the severity of pain of the migraine at its peak compared to placebo. Setting: A tertiary care teaching hospital in Bangkok, Thailand.
Question: Living in an urban environment and non-communicable disease risk in Thailand: Does timing matter? Answer: Does timing matter? Are risk factor prevalence changes since 2009 driven by the emergence of Western risk factors for chronic diseases or might they have a confounding effect on the timing of other changes?
Question: Marital status, living arrangement and mortality: does the association vary by gender? Answer: The association between marital status, living arrangement and mortality does vary by gender.
Question: Major depression and alcohol use disorder in adolescence: Does comorbidity lead to poorer outcomes of depression? Answer: Yes Results/Conclusions: Both depressive disorder and alcohol use disorder independently predict worse outcomes of depression in adolescents, and comorbidity exacerbates this relationship. Thus, greater attention to prevention, early intervention, and comprehensive treatment is required for comorbid disorders in adolescents with major depression. [Email] Email this result item Email the results to the following
Question: Stretch-sensitive KCNQ1 mutation A link between genetic and environmental factors in the pathogenesis of atrial fibrillation? Answer: Review the literature. Keep your mind open to new ideas and concepts. References
Question: Do we need imaging to diagnose appendicitis in children? Answer: Likely yes.
Question: Do resident's leadership skills relate to ratings of technical skill? Answer: Yes.
Question: Are higher rates of depression in women accounted for by differential symptom reporting? Answer: No The question of whether rates of depression in men and women might differ as a result of differential reporting has long been debated, and few issues
Question: Hypotension in patients with coronary disease: can profound hypotensive events cause myocardial ischaemic events? Answer: Not really. In a recent study the Authors stated: Since 2000, regulatory agencies, professional societies, and consensus statements have recommended a low-dose antihypertensive treatment for most patients with hypertension. Paradoxically, since that time, the annual incidence of myocardial infarction in the United States has risen from 215 000 to 275 000
Question: Are laboratories reporting serum quantitative hCG results correctly? Answer: Although the great majority of laboratories are providing acceptable quantitative results, there is a lack of awareness by physicians as to what these results should be.7
Question: Antral follicle assessment as a tool for predicting outcome in IVF--is it a better predictor than age and FSH? Answer: Evaluation of the follicular reserve by Antral follicle count (AFC) is a good predictor of IVF outcome. The number of antral follicles may be regarded as a more reliable predictor of outcome than serum FSH, age or oestradiol levels. On the other hand, the AFC may not be a reliable predictor of ovarian response in relation to outcome in older
Question: Is pain a clinically relevant problem in general adult psychiatry? Answer: I believe there is a pain problem for psychiatric patients and their families, and I do not believe it is unique to one diagnostic group. I believe this because I have seen patients who have pain that is caused by psychiatric
Question: Is Alveolar Macrophage Phagocytic Dysfunction in Children With Protracted Bacterial Bronchitis a Forerunner to Bronchiectasis? Answer: Results of a Retrospective Cohort Study Published in JAMA Pediatrics Study authors: Paul Tanner, Elizabeth Gershwin, Jamie Hontelez, Bridget Hughes, and Jacques Moritz What does this study claim? This study suggested that bacterial bronchitis in childhood is associated with
Question: Discharging patients earlier from Winnipeg hospitals: does it adversely affect quality of care? Answer: Undetermined as the effect on quality of care is difficult to measure; although it may make it more difficult for patients and their families to find available home care support. The transfer of responsibility for care for patients back to home and community
Question: Optimism and survival: does an optimistic outlook predict better survival at advanced ages? Answer: “Mostly No” (!) Sartore et al. Psychosomatic Medicine 2004;66:335-43. Better survival in old age does not correlate with optimism; in fact it is predicted by a pessimistic outlook. One third of
Question: Is grandmultiparity an independent risk factor for adverse perinatal outcomes? Answer: Yes Reviewer's Comments: The authors found a two-fold increase in pregnancy complications associated with grandmultiparity after adjustment for maternal age, parity and socio-economic level (OR 2.10). They are reluctant to categorise
Question: Diagnostic characteristics of child bipolar I disorder: does the "Treatment of Early Age Mania (team)" sample generalize? Answer: In order to generalize to other populations, one would want to look at a study that uses a large, representative sample. This is important, because we want to be sure that we can generalize to the wider population (i.e., not just to those children who happen
Question: Do provider service networks result in lower expenditures compared with HMOs or primary care case management in Florida's Medicaid program? Answer: Yes, in an average of 7 comparison studies, large networks of individual providers with experience in quality improvement were able to reduce expenditures as well as provide good care. This should translate into increased quality in the
Question: Is (18)F-FDG a surrogate tracer to measure tumor hypoxia? Answer: Sometimes Hypoxia, also known as hypoxemia, is a condition in which there is a lower than normal amount of oxygen in the blood. Hypoxia is different from anoxia. In an anoxic situation,
Question: Do viral infections have a role in benign paroxysmal positional vertigo? Answer: Viral infections may contribute to Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV). Studies have shown that a viral infection may precede BPPV in some patients, but no clear mechanism of how it may cause this disorder has been established.
Question: Does the radiographic transition zone correlate with the level of aganglionosis on the specimen in Hirschsprung's disease? Answer:Yes. In most series, the aganglionic portion (shown radiographically by a darkened transition zone) correlates with the atrophic gut on the histologic specimen. A smaller aganglionic portion
Question: Characterization of the gender dimorphism after injury and hemorrhagic shock: are hormonal differences responsible? Answer: Not as far as we can tell from this study, at least. Once again, we have multiple confounding variables. Only mature (I would assume adult, but they do not state this) mice were studied, but I do not believe it was stated how long they were followed. I know that in the other traumatic brain injury papers I looked at, a significant portion of injured mice
Question: Ultra high risk (UHR) for psychosis criteria: are there different levels of risk for transition to psychosis? Answer: It is unclear if different versions of the UHR criteria (UHR-1 or UHR-2) predict clinical transition to psychosis better than the other version.
Question: Does angiotensin-converting enzyme-1 (ACE-1) gene polymorphism lead to chronic kidney disease among hypertensive patients? Answer: Yes, patients with genotype G were associated with a higher risk of developing chronic kidney disease (CKD) among patients with mild-to-moderate hypertension. This
Question: Is there a first night effect on sleep bruxism? Answer: Yes. There is a sleep bruxism first night effect.
Question: Does Residency Selection Criteria Predict Performance in Orthopaedic Surgery Residency? Answer: No. Comparison: None Outcome: Probationary period time Time Interval: Baseline, 6 months, 12 months Population: Orthopaedic Surgery Residents, Surgical First Assistants Purpose: To determine if at the time of residency selection is correlated with outcome in residency. Setting: Design: Retrospective cohort study Outcome Measure: Length of probationary period. Methods: Medical school academic ranking was determined from the match database. 12 months academic performance was determined by the Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES) score. 12 months surgical performance was determined by the National Board of Medical Examiners Part I exam. Results: The average SAGES score was 78%, and the average NBME I was 81%. The mean difference
Question: Do general practice characteristics influence uptake of an information technology (IT) innovation in primary care? Answer: No Citation: What do people believe to be the sources of uptake of IT innovations in general practice? Five broad themes were identified: self (individual or practice characteristics), practice (practice or team characteristics), clinical area (clinical characteristics), region (practice characteristics), and government/agency (eg, the incentives or disincentives provided by government or clinical commissioning groups). Influences from various sources were grouped into
Question: Are high flow nasal cannulae noisier than bubble CPAP for preterm infants? Answer: No, high flow cannulae do not make more noise than bubble CPAP.
Question: BCRABL transcript detection by quantitative real-time PCR : are correlated results possible from homebrew assays? Answer: We report a high degree of correlation of fold-change (FC) of Egr-1 in vehicle-treated BCRABL mice versus two related BCRABL cDNA's used in two distinct homebrew assays. This correspondence was replicated in two independent BCRABL experiments, with two different qPCR assays and two different biological replicates. The degree of agreement suggests that the degree of fold change determined in the independent assays using the same plasmids is a relatively robust measurement. Background information: Multiplexed
Question: Aripiprazole: a new risk factor for pathological gambling? Answer: Aripiprazole is a second generation antipsychotic (SGA) that is increasingly used in the treatment of patients with schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder, bipolar I disorder,
Question: Is the fibronectin-aggrecan complex present in cervical disk disease? Answer: No [3]. Figure 5 This issue was first raised by Januschke et al [4] in 2005. The authors stated that there was no evidence that the glycosaminoglycan-collagen complex was responsible for intervertebral disk degeneration, a proposition which is of key importance in clinical disc regeneration. Later that year, Luchtefeld et
Question: Prostate bed target interfractional motion using RTOG consensus definitions and daily CT on rails : Does target motion differ between superior and inferior portions of the clinical target volume? Answer: Bed target motion is higher in the superior prostate bed for all but the smallest particle size( p =0.09). Thus, for the region with higher clinical target
Question: Advanced epithelial ovarian carcinoma in Thai women: should we continue to offer second-look laparotomy? Answer: No, but improved surgery should be used. Neurosurgical treatment of trigeminal neuralgia: lessons learned from the treatment of 56 patients. Curr Pain Headache Rep. 2009; 13(3):214-26 [Related Publications
Question: Dose end-tidal carbon dioxide measurement correlate with arterial carbon dioxide in extremely low birth weight infants in the first week of life? Answer: Carbon dioxide levels are low at term equivalent age due to high respiratory rate in the first week of life. Click here to access an On-Line Simulation on Emergency Airway Management
Question: Neck pain treatment with acupuncture: does the number of needles matter? Answer: Anecdotally I can say that I have found that a higher number of needles did help with neck pain, but not to the extent that was hoped for. Most of my patients are happy with
Question: Is zero central line-associated bloodstream infection rate sustainable? Answer: YES. Why is this important? The zero central line-associated bloodstream infection rate has been one of the top goals of U.S. hospital stewardship programs since 1999, when it was adopted by the national healthcare accreditation organization, The Joint Commission. Programs to reduce central
Question: Is robotically assisted laparoscopic radical prostatectomy less invasive than retropubic radical prostatectomy? Answer: The short answer is: “no”. (This answer will be edited/updated soon after a long awaited,
Question: Globulomaxillary cysts--do they really exist? Answer: I am surprised that you used the term Globulomaxillary cysts instead of Glomus. Glomus was originally described by Stammer in 1930 and
Question: Is the advanced age a contraindication to GERD laparoscopic surgery? Answer: Yes, advanced age is one of the contraindications for GERD laparoscopic surgery. These patients are not appropriate for laparoscopic procedures, as they may not recover from the laparoscopic surgery adequately. This
Question: Does aerobic fitness influence microvascular function in healthy adults at risk of developing Type 2 diabetes? Answer: Yes. Non-fasting is usually practiced in outpatient and clinical studies of microvascular and vascular function. This may not be optimal for detecting early subclinical dysfunction in those with poor glycemic control, when the best indicators of subclinical dysfunction are
Question: Estradiol and Antagonist Pretreatment Prior to Microdose Leuprolide in in Vitro Fertilization. Does It Improve IVF Outcomes in Poor Responders as Compared to Oral Contraceptive Pill? Answer: No difference with oral contraceptive and menopause. 1:18:10 Should Women Seek Dose Dense to Decrease the Amount of Inter-Follicular Bleeding? Answer: Maybe if starting dose. 1:20:30 What Is the Benefit of GnRH Antagonist for Clomid After HPG Axis
Question: Did the call for boycott by the Catholic bishops affect the polio vaccination coverage in Kenya in 2015? Answer: No. Truth Beats Fake News! – – – – – In summary, Catholic Bishops' Conference of Kenya asked their followers to stop participating in the government run polio vaccination campaign. It is a fact that Catholic Bishops' Conference of Kenya did not ask for people to boycott the
Question: Is neck pain associated with worse health-related quality of life 6 months later? Answer: Yes. Outpatients with neck pain associated with worse health-related quality of life had higher levels of disability at baseline. Multicenter, prospective cohort study (n=3450) Results: Neck pain associated with worse health-related quality of life were more likely to report persistent neck pain and disability after 6 months. Multivariable logistic regression analysis (n=1275) revealed that individuals with neck pain and worse health-related quality of life
Question: Is decompressive surgery effective for spinal cord sarcoidosis accompanied with compressive cervical myelopathy? Answer: We found decompressive surgery and EBRT to be effective for cord compression in cervical spondylosis. Moreover, decompressive surgery had more effective outcomes than EBRT in regards to
Question: Can bedside assessment reliably exclude aspiration following acute stroke? Answer: No, 75% of patients who aspirate following stroke cannot be identified on bedside assessment
Question: Does family practice at residency teaching sites reflect community practice? Answer: No, in some cases dramatically so. Level of Evidence: N/A
Question: Is duration of psychological treatment for depression related to return into treatment? Answer: No, but we can see that duration of treatment is related to episode intensity. Subjects who stayed longer during a therapy had a higher intensity of the episode during the following 12 months. Other studies had found a higher intensity of a depressive episode was a predictive factor for a recurrence of an episode. Return to Treatment for Depression:
Question: Are increased carotid artery pulsatility and resistance indexes early signs of vascular abnormalities in young obese males? Answer: increased Filed under: Case studies
Question: Can mental imagery functional magnetic resonance imaging predict recovery in patients with disorders of consciousness? Answer: Functional mental imagery functional magnetic resonance imaging could help predict recovery in patients with disorders of consciousness, even several months after an injury.
Question: Does the Simultaneous Use of a Neuroendoscope Influence the Incidence of Ventriculoperitoneal Shunt Infection? Answer: The frequency of shunt infection in patients who underwent neuroendoscopic examination with a simultaneous shunt placement was not different than
Question: Can a Novel Surgical Approach to the Temporomandibular Joint Improve Access and Reduce Complications? Answer: Yes. In a new study, radiologic and clinical scores for pain and function significantly improved in patients who underwent partial TMJ decompression with lateral release. In patients with pain due to TMJ dysfunction, patients with
Question: Does laparoscopic cholecystectomy influence peri-sinusoidal cell activity? Answer: Routine peri-sinusoidal activity tests did not change after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. However, some peri-sinusoidal cells showed a significantly increased diurnal variation of activity after surgery. According to this, surgery could have an effect on peri-sinusoidal cells as a result of disturbed autonomic activity. Keywords: Sinusoids; Cholecystectomy; Laparoscopic; Activity INTRODUCTION Numerous studies have confirmed the fact that both biliary and
Question: Do mossy fibers release GABA? Answer: Yes, mossy fibers release GABA via synapse-specific carriers. The actions of GABA on postsynaptic neurons are mediated by its binding to postsynaptic GABAA receptors which open Cl− channels. When Cl− channels open, Cl− moves out of the cell and its concentration decreases, generating a positive voltage change called an action potential.
Question: Reporting and interpreting red blood cell morphology: is there discordance between clinical pathologists and clinicians? Answer: Yes J Nucl Med. 2003;44:1279-1284. Cline HM, Halpern M, Williams GH. The slides are of normal specimens, but all the pictures are highlighted in different colours. It seems they didn't clean the blood completely, so there are contaminating cells from heparin still stained red. (I took the picture with normal illumination, not UV, so
Question: Colorectal cancer in young patients: is it a distinct clinical entity? Answer: Yes. A population-based, nested case–control study involving 63 cases and 3,550 controls confirms that the clinical and pathological characteristics of colorectal cancer in young patients differ from
Question: Is discordance in TEOAE and AABR outcomes predictable in newborns? Answer: Discordance in hearing outcomes in newborns is unpredictable. The best practice is to identify infants at risk of hearing loss who should undergo screening.
Question: May student examiners be reasonable substitute examiners for faculty in an undergraduate OSCE on medical emergencies? Answer: Yes. Longer answer: Student examiners who have taken a specific OSCE program and taken a test of the same or higher level for which a candidate is being
Question: Amblyopia: is visual loss permanent? Answer: Not always. When amblyopia is detected at an early age and when proper treatment is given, there is a fair chance that the affected person will recover. This is especially true for the most common cause of amblyopia, the refractive error (for example, myopia). Less commonly, when the cause is strabismus (misalignment of the
Question: Does prior benign prostate biopsy predict outcome for patients treated with radical perineal prostatectomy? Answer: The answer is no. Major conclusion: There was no difference between patients with a negative biopsy and radical prostatectomy. The symptoms are the same. [Medscape, November 10, 2009] Journal
Question: Does minimal access major surgery in the newborn hurt less? Answer: No pain is experienced during or after minor newborn surgery that is performed under local anesthesia.
Question: Is external palliative radiotherapy for gallbladder carcinoma effective? Answer: In patients with unresectable gallbladder carcinoma, the addition of external-beam radiation therapy to chemotherapy is safe and associated with modest survival gains. (LOE = 2a−)
Question: The use of audit to identify maternal mortality in different settings: is it just a difference between the rich and the poor? Answer: How we got where we are today An important motivation for increasing the coverage of DHS was to better measure the burden of disease in populations. The 1998 UN Millennium Development Goals (MDG) includes the aim to ‘halve, between 1990 and 2015, the maternal mortality ratio’. As recently as 2006, this had been made into a specific target,
Question: Transgastric endoscopic splenectomy: is it possible? Answer: Samir Kassri Laparoscopic-assisted splenic devascularization: present status
Question: Are environmental factors important in primary systemic vasculitis? Answer: Endotoxin, sepsis, lymphoma, EBV, vaccination, microorganisms and drugs are all implicated in the development of PIV.
Question: Does the central venous pressure predict fluid responsiveness? Answer: No. However, in most patient populations studied the use of CVP in the acute care setting is not associated with worse outcomes. References: J.A. Eisenberg, M.A. Neuman, E.L.
Question: Do preoperative statins reduce atrial fibrillation after coronary artery bypass grafting? Answer: No. Read More... Cardiac Surgery Study Network (CSN)
Question: Prognosis of low-tone sudden deafness - does it inevitably progress to Meniere's disease? Answer: The following are from www.neuron.org/content/article/fulltext?genre=article&sid=2&article=3881_rsvpmnd&pg=1_1_3. View the online question and answer .
Question: Is primary angioplasty an acceptable alternative to thrombolysis? Answer: Yes
Question: Is it necessary to insert a nasobiliary drainage tube routinely after endoscopic clearance of the common bile duct in patients with choledocholithiasis-induced cholangitis? Answer: Data are insufficient to answer this question, but meta-analysis (OR 0.4, 95% CI 0.3–0.5) suggests that if ERC is needed, routine insertion of nasobiliary drainage is not needed.
Question: Does birth center care during a woman's first pregnancy have any impact on her future reproduction? Answer: Interestingly, a woman who chooses to have a planned birth center birth for her first birth is likely to deliver her subsequent babies at the same facility, and to
Question: Are UK radiologists satisfied with the training and support received in suspected child abuse? Answer: Answer not available due to low survey response rate.
Question: Does preoperative anemia adversely affect colon and rectal surgery outcomes? Answer: In patients with prior CABG and major abdominal surgery who require colon and rectal surgery, RBC transfusions are associated with an increased risk of cardiac events.
Question: Does septoplasty change the dimensions of compensatory hypertrophy of the middle turbinate? Answer: The available published research regarding middle turbinate hypertrophy after septoplasty suggests a tendency for compensatory growth (3 of 5 studies show
Question: Upstream solutions: does the supplemental security income program reduce disability in the elderly? Answer: for persons aged 18-50 (N = 106,755), it did not matter. However, for persons aged 50 and over (N = 104,596), having supplemental security income reduced disability more than did no receipt of supplemental security income. Bottom line: the age of your family members might determine which public insurance program might be best for you. For young people,
Question: Increased neutrophil migratory activity after major trauma: a factor in the etiology of acute respiratory distress syndrome? Answer: Maybe not… Bottom Line: Increased neutrophil count and activity in severely injured trauma patients correlates with increased mortality (OR 1.7, 95% CI 1.1-2.5), however no correlation was found between neutrophil activity and incidence of acute respiratory distress syndrome. These findings lead to the conclusion that neutrophil mediated injury is not an independent factor in the development of acute respiratory distress syndrome. Clinical
Question: A patient with myelomeningocele: is untethering necessary prior to scoliosis correction? Answer: A short and straight spine from T10-L3 is a target after posterior instrumentation and laminectomy. This will be much easier to reach with an unwinding scoliosis correction first (yes, it is the opposite of what the “art of
Question: Body perception: do parents, their children, and their children's physicians perceive body image differently? Answer: Research suggests that for females there is a poor correlation between actual body weight and body mass index (BMI) on the one hand and parental perception of ideal body weight and BMI on the other. 54544_ch03_162-201 8/23/05 11:48 AM Page
Question: The insertion allele of the ACE gene I/D polymorphism. A candidate gene for insulin resistance? Answer: Carriers of a variant insertion allele (I) of the ACE gene have increased circulating levels of ACE. They also have increased insulin resistance (Korpela et al., Diabetes, 2009;58:1061-1070). This has been interpreted to mean
Question: The clinical significance of bile duct sludge: is it different from bile duct stones? Answer: Bile duct sludge is present in up to 4.5% of asymptomatic people. The majority (over 90%) of patients with sludge have no clinical symptoms. Bile duct stones are present in
Question: Preoperative staging of patients with liver metastases of colorectal carcinoma. Does PET/CT really add something to multidetector CT? Answer: The authors compared a multidetector CT (MDCT) to positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET/CT) for staging patients with colorectal liver metastases. MDCT and PET/CT did not significantly differ with regard to the detection of liver metastases. However, PET/CT had higher accuracy in the detection of proximal metastases.
Question: Does the distribution of health care benefits in Kenya meet the principles of universal coverage? Answer: Yes and No (Kenya Health Sector Support Programme 2005, p. 1). This characterizes much of the health systems’ improvement debate, where countries seek to “reach” the middle-income country standard and, once at that level, to “leapfrog” the standard to universal coverage. Questions such as these are the most important for countries facing such strong income inequalities and institutional disparities (within and across
Question: Does cognitive function predict frequency compressed speech recognition in listeners with normal hearing and normal cognition? Answer: Although not well specified in the abstract, the authors used the word “better” to describe participants with better cognitive function. These participants did not demonstrate better listening performance but rather greater cognitive processing. Interestingly, the term “better”
Question: Preoperative platelet count in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma: is it a prognostic factor? Answer: Preoperative platelet count may be a prognostic factor for squamous cell carcinoma of esophagus. A prospective study with 260 patients has been conducted. The study revealed a significant difference in survival rates between the patients with
Question: Long-term significance of postictal psychotic episodes II. Are they predictive of interictal psychotic episodes? Answer: The review of 28 studies of interictal psychosis and ictal psychosis yielded that interictal psychosis is not necessarily predictive of ictal psychosis. Several of the studies were case studies or
Question: Are Biochemical Markers of Bone Turnover Representative of Bone Histomorphometry in 370 Postmenopausal Women? Answer: Comparable Markers Do Not Exist. Presenter: Stephen Bozzola, DO, FEBRUARY 11, 2006 Available online at http://www.osteopenia-osteoporosis.com/webcasts/gis-bozzola.pdf
Question: Is lumbar drainage of postoperative cerebrospinal fluid fistula after spine surgery effective? Answer: Yes, lumbar drainage of postoperative cerebrospinal fluid fistula after spine surgery is effective. A lumbar drain (catheter) is placed at the time of surgery. It remains in
Question: Impact of MPH programs: contributing to health system strengthening in low- and middle-income countries? Answer: One or more studies have shown an association between implementation of MPH programs and improvements in HRH policies and institutional structures in low- and middle-income countries [85,85] although there are other studies that do not find an association [87,89]. This relationship could be due to changes in some aspects of health care workforce as a result of
Question: Locoregional opening of the rodent blood-brain barrier for paclitaxel using Nd:YAG laser-induced thermo therapy: a new concept of adjuvant glioma therapy? Answer: These are excellent and very promising preliminary results. They should be regarded as preliminary observations. A lot of investigation will need to be
Question: Do episodic migraineurs selectively attend to headache-related visual stimuli? Answer: Yes, a study of 71 episodic migraineurs and 100 controls found that episodic migraineurs tended to be more sensitive to subtle details in visual stimuli (Gianaros et al., 2004). The investigators also found that chronic migraineurs were more sensitive to various classes of stimuli compared to episodic migraineurs and controls.
Question: Visceral adipose tissue area measurement at a single level: can it represent visceral adipose tissue volume? Answer: Visceral adipose tissue area measurement at a single level cannot represent visceral adipose tissue volume. The advantage of this method is that only one sample of biopsy or magnetic resonance imaging can be taken. Therefore, it is easier and cheaper than 3-dimensional imaging, CT, and MRI. On the other hand, single imaging cannot present a comprehensive view of adipose tissue distribution. As many parts of the body
Question: Does gestational age misclassification explain the difference in birthweights for Australian aborigines and whites? Answer: No. In an eight-year study in a maternity hospital in Western Australia, gestational age was assessed by two obstetricians at each birth by measurement of fundal height, and classified
Question: Is there a correlation between androgens and sexual desire in women? Answer: Female libido can be influenced by male hormones. Most of us have heard about how women's testosterone levels drop with menopause, but little has been discussed about the effect of testosterone on female sexuality. While male testosterone is well known to stimulate sexual desire
Question: Is there a role for fondaparinux in perioperative bridging? Answer: a short and sweet answer to that one – Yes! Answer: For the data supporting early administration and use, please see here: Tobin TA, Massaro D, Haut
Question: Do African American women require fewer calories to maintain weight? Answer: African American women have a much higher rate of obesity than African American men. This is due to the higher amount of body fat
Question: Is crime associated with over-the-counter pharmacy syringe sales? Answer: Yes. The prevalence of illegally obtained prescription drugs and methamphetamine among people who inject drugs increased from 2007 to 2010 in the 2 counties
Question: Are lower fasting plasma glucose levels at diagnosis of type 2 diabetes associated with improved outcomes? Answer: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first cohort study demonstrating that achieving fasting plasma glucose levels of ≤6.0 mmol/L at diagnosis of type 2 diabetes significantly reduced the risk of cardiovascular disease and all-cause mortality in the subsequent 6 years. This effect was more
