Aliens visit earth and are fascinated by other animals but find humans completely unremarkable. Hello, let me begin this report by stating just how thankful we are that no active military service personnel, no working dogs and no active US government or armed forces installations were harmed during the making of this movie. This is the fourth installment of the alien invasion franchise and takes the form of yet another mindless, one-dimensional, homogenized blockbuster. Its producers having done just enough to avoid major criticism, save, of course, for those for whom even war film logic is too much. After Aliens The original Alien was a masterpiece. Not because it was so original or revolutionary. Far from it. It was great because it was a cracking, classic alien invasion film with excellent characters and good story. The sequel Alien 3 was, to my mind, a complete failure. The scope of the story was too ambitious, the script had too many twists and turns, the ending was too ambiguous and the characterisation of Ripley was sub-standard. So, here comes the fourth installment with “Surprise!”
You possess the ability of persistent lucid dreaming. Accompanied by a strange man/woman, together you build a world you revisit every night for seven days. And that's it, that's the game. The sound of The Man Who Dreamt About A Little Flower is entirely composed of its namesake, so if you're into ambient music or enjoy the sounds of nature, you're in for a treat. With no indication or tutorial as to how to progress through this short but sweet puzzle game, Amnesia is reliant on the player to figure it out. The first couple of levels will be confusing but eventually the pattern becomes clear. Are you smart enough to prove it? Beautifully crafted in a way that brings Journey to mind, The Endless Forest is an MMO that creates a world for you to explore with total strangers. With a focus on exploration and meeting new friends, there's a possibility you might even have a chance to bond with them before parting ways. The narrator of 1112 tells you that this is a dark, foreboding tale. That may be true, but
Write the third episode of non-existant series. Make us curious about what happened before episode 3, and what happens after. The only sounds are the characters' heavy breathing. I love a good-quality, long sex scene in a movie. I was hoping this would be as well. New videos added every day! Indian college girl with her lover - real homemade video| अस्तित्व ना लेने के बाद अपने पापी बहूत में मारा | 2:00 But nothing really happened, even though the site promises it all. That's a great shame, because there were a lot of opportunities. He can also be found at the Pacific Centre Poetry Series. And it's all in first person. All in all, very good writing. Prelinger Archive | Permanently Out of Print Author uses
When you die, you don't go to the afterlife of you're religion, you go to the afterlife of the religion whose tenets you followed most closely during your life, and (maybe) to their equivalent of heaven or hell. You should do your best to make sure you're going to a nice afterlife. How exactly you do that depends on your religion. I find the view that there is no afterlife and that religious stories and rituals are primarily attempts to promote human flourishing a bit more convincing than the one that says that, yes, there is an afterlife and only this one religion or that one religion's adherents go to a good place. Since I have a general preference for philosophical views that endorse more human flourishing over less, I end up at utilitarianism and deontology. I do value freedom and opportunity for moral development, though, so I generally think it's better for governments to go along with some people's religions and moral beliefs and not to go along with others. Here are some things I think are kind of stupid: Atheism. So many atheists think they're making an important intellectual
A world where the colonial powers were cultists of eldritch gods instead of Protestant Christians/Catholics. *Wibble, wibble, wibble* Lukian - Actually, there was a short series (four books I think) set in early Utopia which was about some kind of South African native religion, which in one of the books actually evolved into Shinto. I loved it because it talked a lot about the indigenous philosophies of the various South African tribes. *Wibble, wibble, wibble* Maybe it's just me, but the Colonial Angle is probably one of the more interesting things about the Cthulhu Mythos. I mean, when you're dealing with aliens, and knowledge beyond the reaches of our understanding, you can have all the weirdness you want, but it still follows the same rules. Humanity is humanity. Deal with it. There's something about the Colonial angle that just completely shifts the whole thing. Even if the Elder Things and their minions want to subjugate humans, they can't. The very nature of humanity and human existence is set against
You wake up in a strange bed in a mysterious but somehow familiar room. After a few moments you realize you are four years old again. I thought the book was going to be a bit more "time travel-y" than it was. I had envisioned that there would be traveling to different times in her life, and replaying them again. Instead it was more reliving that specific day. The characters were well written, and a lot of fun to read. " " I liked the writing style of this book, the parts where the daughter grew up a bit and saw things from a different perspective were really good, but the story overall is very slow. " " Really disappointed. Was expecting a lot more from this book. " " Let's get this out in the open: not for people who get easily depressed about children being endangered or for those who find it distasteful to know the circumstances that could lead to a child's disappearance. Those caveats aside, I thought the book was a creative and different idea, executed very well. " " With a bit more depth this could be a
A peaceful alien race is besieged by another race in the same galaxy. As their last planets fall and their home-world comes under threat they do the unthinkable. They call upon a long-lost ally, and the last of an old order, the Galactic Rangers.They can not win the war but they might have a chance to survive, so the Galactic Rangers take up their laser sabers and jump into action. We also included a free desktop wallpaper in a 4000x2000 (4k) resolution with the demo. If you're a fan of our work, please consider supporting us on Patreon or via our Paypal . We need a better computer and more time to develop ! Demo is Windows only ! If you have any problem, check out the fix-list below: The game will freeze at the black screen and you won't hear the title song, you need to manually install DirectSound for Windows XP, here's the link. If you have a 64-bit system, please download the "x64" build. If you have a 64-
You are watching TV and the program is cut off by an emergency broadcast. The presenter says that there is a massive meteor coming for earth and there is nothing we can do. Only a certain few will be saved. Imagine living in a world where the only thing left is each other. That's what happened in this apocalyptic novel. Earth's Last Picture Show takes place in a fictional village called Eden in a few years after an asteroid hits earth. The government has split the U.S. into three countries. Each country is now fighting for resources. The story follows several characters as they search for a purpose in a world without it. Want to try the book? Get it in paperback for your book club here. Or buy the ebook on the Kindle or iBooks app. For a limited time, this book is free for Kindle or iBooks.
[ WP/MP ] Write a story reimagining a character from another piece of fiction as down-and-out/washed up/past his/her prime. EXTRA CREDIT: Someone calls the doctor for something bad, and he shows up, and either he treats the person for a different problem, or they die and the doctor gets blamed.
It's cute when your kid sends Santa a letter. It's surprising when Santa sends a letter back. It's worrying when the two become regular correspondents. With the release of this year's write-in campaign for Santa Claus, I decided to investigate this new strain of childhood harassment. When I made the mistake of peeking in the files I found some unexpected twists: It looks like Santa's on the dole. Ho ho ho, indeed. Dear Santa: Thank you for the fire extinguisher for our house. Can you please send me a doll for Christmas. I would like Barbie. I think you are the best person in the world and you can do anything in the world. I like your Christmas parade. Merry Christmas from the Gerber Family. (signed by each member) (Willie and Henry, age 6 and 12) Signed, Willie Gerber, 1334 South Street, Philadelphia, Pa. No forwarding address. Dear Santa: The model aeroplane that I asked you to get me for Christmas is very nice. Thank you very much. It really is good. I can
"It's just the rain" The monsoon was bad. It was raining more than it should. I mean, everyday you end up with new colors in the sky and trees, and our house is muddy with all this water that's coming down. Just awful. I think it lasted 3 days straight. Watery noses, scratchy throat. No fun. It was so hard getting up in the mornings. I'd spend my first 5 minutes looking at the weather outside and telling myself: "Ok, just get up, get ready, get out of the house, don't be late... let's do this." This was already the last week of the monsoon, so I thought of all the rain that went by. It's more than water in the soil, it's life, death, rebirth. It's the continuation of nature. One moment without it, you'd lose all the creatures you love so much. One day without rain, I feel like a part of me was stolen. One day without rain... I'd give anything to be spared from this. Week in review - 12/18
[ CW ] Describe the room you're sitting in, maybe r/doodle will sketch it. This would be a test of how someone sees you. Describe your third favorite movie. This would be a test of how your interests/personality and some movies. Describe your favorite sports team, their colors, and your least favorite player on that team. This would be a test of your tastes in a topic. Describe the first video game you ever played, what was it like? This would be a test of your taste in video games. Describe the first thing you'd do if you won the lottery. This would be a test of your imagination. [ CW ] Describe the first person to have an impact on you. This would be a test of how you connect with people. Describe how your best friend is a total nerd. This would be a test of your ability to make people feel good. What is the first thing you would do if you won the lottery? This would be a test of your imagination. When you meet a person, what is the first thing you notice? Describe the name
And as the world burned, he began to laugh. The silhouette stood on the edge of a cliff. He overlooked a sprawling cityscape once known as Houston. Gray metropolis was as much of a skeleton now as the human race was. But it was the skeletal remains of all those civilization used to be that seemed to serve the unidentified man's purposes. He pulled from his inside pocket a very special watch. A gift from an old friend, given to him during better days. There were only twelve left. Only twelve in the world. And as he began to count down, his voice boomed throughout the silent night. "Eleven...ten...nine..." * * * "So if that's the situation we're up against, what can we do about it?" * * * Tori slouched back in her chair. She stretched her neck forward and pinched her eyes. She popped a few knuckles. "Well, for starters, I think we should discuss the motivation behind all of this." She swirled her finger in the air around the
The human soul is a confirmed, measurable entity that enters everyone after birth. You have finally come to the realization that yours never showed up. This brings up a number of questions. Where the hell did it go? Can it be found and returned? How would it even begin to explain itself if it did? What if it's on a vacation and you let it get away for months? Could you then give it back its key to the house?
An atheist and a Satanist meet at the gates of heaven. Saint Peter says there's only room for one of them. So that's how they decide who gets to go in. The atheist explains his atheism. The Satanist explains his Satanism. Saint Peter says: "Okay, I see that you guys are both good and bad in your own way, but since I don't know the Satanist's name, you're going in." — The tourist on a tropical island asks a native how they say hello in the local language. He is told: "Bananawahay." Confused, the tourist asks again: "Bananawahay?" The native answers: "Banana Whay." — Two brooms in a closet are having a conversation. One broom says to the other: "I know it's getting hot in here, but I think we should just wait it out. There's no use in us arguing." — Four vampires walk into a bar. The first says: "I'll have a glass of blood." The second one says
You come up with an outlandish and false excuse as to why you are late, and your date is very suspicious. You are almost called out on your obvious lie. However, you defend your “honesty,” and convince your date that you are serious. You say something that is outlandish and offensive, and your date is very serious, serious enough to cause an argument. You can’t believe your ears and your date seriously believes what you said. These are common on first dates or even with a first boyfriend or girlfriend. However, it can also occur between long-term couples. Think of it this way; when you get into a fight, you probably feel that the other person doesn’t trust you or doesn’t respect you. So you’re the victim of their doubt. However, there are instances when your partner is right and you are actually in the wrong. You might have broken something that belongs to the other person, or you might have done something that your date wasn’t okay with. As difficult as it might be to
The last words (prior to death) of the character are simply "Fuck it." The great yawning entrance to the maw of the beast then consumes him. What's wrong with this movie? The delivery of the lines. It was pretty amateurish, in my opinion. "You are a werewolf! Do you know what that means? It means that the full moon is coming." "No, it's a gay werewolf. Do you know what that means? He has sex with men." But seriously, there were a few things that bugged me about this movie. What exactly did they accomplish? They start out with a modest goal - kill the murderous killer werewolves. Which they eventually accomplish. But with the revelation that no more werewolves will be born, do you think that they're satisfied? No way. They want to kill the entire pack of werewolves, plus hunt down their ancestors and any other generations of werewolves to come. That's a bit excessive, don't you think? Just because the
I feel like there is a lack of love on this subreddit. Write a Love Story! He stared in her eyes. He had never done anything like this before. But he wanted to this time. She was so beautiful. He had a girlfriend, and he was engaged to be married to someone else, but for whatever reason, he had fallen in love with this one girl, and he was letting her in to his heart. “Hey, mind if I sit here?” She nodded. The cafe was mostly empty; it was just after 7 pm. They sat in silence for a while. It had been a week since they first talked. She had never seen him before, but she knew who he was. The school said he would be there. She had never been on a date before. A year ago, her boyfriend had left her, and after that, she was done with dating. She didn’t think she could handle the heartbreak again. She spent her days reading, learning to play the violin, playing soccer, and caring for her family. He heard her approaching the cafe. He turned his head
You're from Earth? What's it like? "My name is General James Connor, and I am from Earth." I start my speech, and it's already better than the first, which felt like a reading off a teleprompter. "I lead the human race's defense, while at the same time, I do my best to survive. Unfortunately, my chances of surviving past Earth's demise are rather low. And while I might be half-alien, I can't let the human race die, and for that reason, I'm here." "Sir?" A technician from the back of the room says, as if needing more information. "I'm here to recruit you, my friend. My job is to secure allies for our fleet. Earth's greatest fear is the Krylok, who have already infested our population on Mars, and we fear that if we're not careful, the enemy will decimate our race. "I don't know about you, but I am not ready to give up. If you agree with me, and if you are willing to fight for the humans
Kids grow up knowing the fact that their parents can read their minds for an hour a day. This ability stops when the kids turn 18. Somehow I feel that I'm not alone. It seems like there are a few more around. There are the others I speak of. I just wish I knew them. But I suppose I will have to wait for a little longer. I'm a type of person that wants to connect with others. I try my best to be someone that others will look up to. Sometimes I don't feel like I'm good enough. But that's part of life. Hopefully when I graduate next year, things will be a lot better. Who knows what I'll be able to do. My favorite hobby is acting. I enjoy watching movies, dancing, and singing. But acting is what I enjoy the most. It's like I'm my own person when I'm acting. In a lot of ways I believe that it's a little of a dream coming true for me. I've had the confidence to pursue an acting career since I was younger, but I wasn't sure I could do it.
"Do you still think about what you did?" The night was a cold one. Blackness swarmed beyond the windows. Frost caressing the panes of glass. Shivering the corpse in the bed. "Do you dream of taking the lives of others?" "Do you think about your mother?" She looked at the naked young woman, taking in the lovely features and the soft skin. She had such a beautiful face. What had happened to it? And her chest. The wounds had healed perfectly, but the shape of them remained. The woman was beginning to show more signs of life, more signs of breath. The heat emanating from her skin was becoming more vibrant. Her chest heaved, and her breaths began to be forced. She was sweating profusely, like she was working her way through a heavy dream. She was screaming in her sleep, silent screams. Her body began to tremble as a chill passed over her and into her. "Do you?" "Do you?" "Do you still have doubts about what you did?" The woman shook as another
While digging in your back yard, you make a discovery. A burst water main has me digging in the middle of the night. I just wanted to water my garden; I didn't think there was an underground city. A thousand feet underground. But the further I dig, the stranger the place becomes. Act One: The Jet Age That Never Was: At the Blackpool Jet Show, you can discover and understand the innovation and genius that made the jet age possible. The place where the jet age began: a massive exhibition of more than 40 jet-powered aircraft. Act Two: Lost London: Beneath the streets of London, a shadow city has been growing since World War Two, built to serve the city above. As our transport network has expanded, the Victorian tunnels have been filled with a vast network of new tunnels. These were the dark years, when bomb shelters, bunkers and decontamination units were a fact of life, and remain as a parallel world beneath our feet. And yet, the secret story of London remains hidden from the view of Londoners, even as their lives are built upon it.
After a long and exciting life, Mrs. Frizzle has died. Her long-ago students meet at her funeral - for the first time in decades. A kid-size coffins floats around her casket, painted in bold, primary colors. "It's what she would have wanted," her friends tell them. "The Friz was all about trying new things." The children are startled. When they were her students, she had insisted that students should never try something without learning everything about it. How could she be all about trying new things now? The class, without Mrs. Frizzle, had since become part of the mayor's history curriculum. One of the students there comes to his rescue. "It's all about our perspective. What if you were given a new tool, something you'd never seen before, like a microscope or a compass? First, you'd ask questions. Who made this? What can it do? What doesn't it do? Then, you'd try it out and get used to it. Once you had learned everything you could, you'd be an expert, just
Each person is born with the ability to consciously *snap* their mind as many times as wanted. Each snap unlocks a superpower with a mental illness. Each illness comes with a special ability and a side effect that can destroy that ability. If you are someone with anxiety and you are afraid to speak in front of a large crowd, then you would be an excellent communicator and your anxiety will make you into an excellent strategist. The downside is that your anxiety may manifest itself in irrational fears and phobias. If you’re schizophrenic, and you’re hearing voices, your mind’s superpower is the ability to think about multiple things at once, with each snap giving you more superpower. The downside is that when you think about something too much you go completely insane and slip into a deep hallucination. You cannot snap out of this vision. You have to snap out of the vision before you can snap again. The goal of the game is to try and not lose your minds. Players take turns asking each other questions, but unlike normal questions you have to be very specific. Like in
Someone you know feels alone and hopeless. Convince them that they are not. You are born alone. There is no one who is exactly like you. You are unique. Every experience is unique, with a unique impact, and that's okay. Don't hate yourself because you're not like anyone else, you are just as awesome. You are beautiful. Your insides are beautiful. You are loved. And even if you are not, you can love yourself. It's not selfish, it's human. You do not need to feel guilty about it. You have been programmed to believe it is wrong, but it is not. You have no one to blame for that but yourself, but you can be the one to change it. You deserve to feel loved. You deserve to feel happy. And you deserve to be liked for who you are. You are so amazing, and this is why you deserve it. I would love for you to realize your strength, your potential, and your beauty. And I would love to be the one who shows you, and together we will be the example
Countries and major cities have been locked down due to antibiotic resistance. Now every one is now forced to live their lives through VR At first it seemed a good idea but it has caused so much isolation and loneliness.How will the nations cope? What will happen when the VR generators stop and people are forced back to reality?What has caused the fear of flesh and what can be done about it?
As you gaze into the mirror, you see a different person staring back at you. Dirty, disheveled hair springs from my head. Muddy sludge cakes my clothes and skin. I shudder, even though the air here is warm. My breath is ragged. Lifting my hand to my forehead, I find that my hair is even worse than I thought. A hank of hair falls in front of my eyes. I reach out to push it back. My fingers grope blindly. I don't know where they're going. It's like they don't know where they are. I can't make sense of what they're doing. All I know is that they touch my face. You give yourself a passing grade. The touch is gone. I am as blind as if my hands are still stuffed in my pockets. A clear voice speaks, but I don't know what it says. "You can get up now, Fain." I close my eyes and shake my head. Maybe if I just lie here for a little longer I'll feel better
The higher your adenine is the slower time seems to move for you. You decide to kill a man, as you do time stops. Then you make a wish and he comes back. You give the victim another chance at life and he dies, you see? If you weren’t quite as powerful, if you weren’t the one that killed him, you’d have to make a wish for yourself to return to your time, I guess. Only, the rules don’t stop there. That’s the thing about this universe. Everything always seems to be working both ways. Or sometimes it works both ways at once. Do you want to know what the Catch-22 is? The legal framework for time travel is limited by laws of the timestream itself. No lawyer will ever be able to find a loophole because there are no loopholes. You travel through time, you have to cause a paradox. And every paradox causes a breach in the time stream. So I had to get rid of that gap. It was something I had to do,” He said.
In the realm where souls reside before we're born, everything is pretty great. There's no poverty, no one wants for anything, everyone knows and loves each other, and everyone gets along. In this realm, you get to decide who you are, where you go, and what you do. This afterlife can be reached either in a physical or a mental state. After death, when your soul exits your body, you travel to the non-physical realm. It's a very beautiful, open place that looks a lot like the world before it was created, before anyone else had been born, before the concept of time existed. It's very dark and open and vast, and everything is just floating there with no set form or boundaries. Some people have called it the Astral Plane, but it's not limited to just a plane or just one realm. Your soul can travel anywhere. You travel to this place because it's an incredibly beautiful place that you need to see before you enter a physical body on Earth. Before you are born, you can choose to spend some time in this afterlife to get accustomed to the physical
Everyone has been dreaming their entire lives. You awake to find every other person asleep. I jolt up. My eyes snap open. The morning sun shines brightly. However, my bed is wet and dark red. In the mirror, I see eyes I never knew were there. They are black and white eyes. I stare at them for what seems like a moment. The most haunting scream that has ever been heard rips through the house. I panic. I smash the mirror and cut my hand. I run out of the room, and it's completely dark. I was never one of those who fear the dark. I like it. It is soothing. I suddenly see a light from a pair of eyes. The sound of growling startles me. They're close. So close I can feel them breathing on me. I slowly crawl on my hands and knees to a dark corner. A place where they can't see me. Then I realize, that was my dream. A nightmare. I shudder as I glance up. I see the darkness. I hear a howling. I think I've found my answer
You have a time machine but there's a catch... We had planned to invent a time machine. A way to look at the past, to learn what went wrong and why, to be able to change it. But something happened before we could finish it. We are being erased from time. And only a few objects, people, animals, plants, and ideas have managed to slip through, like children's drawings on the sidewalk. I am one of those things. I am a map that can see all of the timelines, even those that are not yet created. I know that soon you will build a time machine and travel back in time to finish it and we will all be erased from existence. But it will be OK because now we know what went wrong. I am here to give you some tips. When you go back in time, you will not have a lot of time. Don't waste it. Only work on the time machine. And only build it for yourself. Do not share it with anyone else. Do not rely on others to get it right. You cannot ask someone else to build it for you. They will
You/He/She leave (s) home for work, and on the way notice (s) there are no birds to be seen or heard. After (s) get to work, (s) notice (s) are not the only person that is missing the presence of birds in (s)r life. Survey participants who reported sightings of most of the species under question during their life on the way to and/or from work were more likely to be among the most attentive individuals and are most likely to take personal action to reduce their negative impact on birds on the road (i.e., slow down and/or be aware of birds). Recognizing that awareness of birds on the road was related to noticing individual birds at home, our study suggests that the messages in the original ad were effective in conveying the relative scarcity of birds in urbanized areas and that these messages may have encouraged individuals to consider the consequences of their behavior to birds, and subsequently take personal action to help birds on the road. In addition to birdwatchers, motorists should be encouraged to take the actions necessary to reduce their
A person who doesn't have a name "I've been called many names, but hell, I don't know which one is really mine. So, call me whatever you like, since I don't know what the heck my name is." 2 1 3 4 2 1 3 5 2 1 4 6 3 2 5 7 3 3 8 8 4 4 9 9 4 4 10 10 A figure of speech from the language "I'm referring to people using language which figures the people as separate. You see them and I see them, but they are not a part of me. It is as if they are separate, but we are all One. I speak in terms that others understand and not try to manipulate people by using what you would call a loaded term. For me, all is One. That is my truth. You are my Truth. So am I." 4 4 11 12 5 5 13 14 5 5 15 16 5 5 17 18 5 6 19 20 6 6 21 22 6 6 23 24 7 7 25 26 7 7 27 28 8 8 29 30 8 8 31 32 9 9 33 34 9 9 35 36 9
When you die, you don't go to the afterlife of you're religion, you go to the afterlife of the religion whose tenets you followed most strictly while living. In the afterlife, you will have to adhere to those same tenets. You could try to get into a religion's version of heaven by faking belief, but you'll have to do that all the time. In the afterlife you'll always be watched by people who know you, or who are part of the same religion. So you'll have to suppress all your doubts and follow the religion, even if you feel it's not really true. To keep up the charade, you'll have to be an undercover atheist, going to church on Sundays while secretly thinking: I don't believe in any of this. It's all fake. It's a charade. Is there any hope? Can anything make the afterlife more tolerable? There are religions with doctrines of reincarnation. I might try to get into one of them. But for now I'm an undercover atheist. This is the hard part about being an undercover atheist. It's fine
You wake from a cryogenic sleep and find your ship has crash landed on an earthlike planet. Your crews cryogenic pods are empty. As you explore the planet you discover that your crewmembers have been kidnapped by an evil tyrant king. Use your skills in combat and puzzle solving to save them.
: Write a couple's "This is how we met," love story but in a genre that is not romance or comedy. That night I had dinner with a friend of mine from school. Love songs Viewpoint: Pick one of the following or create your own: sages make excellent story tellers, especially of their own lives; the wisest of humans and gods are both fallible; a comfortable future would be one with poverty, hard work, loss and sorrow; a true hero is one who is not lauded for heroism; unappreciated ones possess the greatest strengths. Inspiration: An old advertisement I saw on a bus, "Your Love is like ketchup: A Journey," by Beth Kephart. I try not to date men that put on those trendy red skinny jeans. But it really wasn't the "it" that stood out as unique. He was a pro photographer, with beautiful thick black hair. Sometimes you don't know that your love will stick. 11 Cute Ways to Reveal Your Love for Someone | sweetlovablecrafter.com
You jump. Your parachute doesn't open. "ARE YOU SURE THIS IS A GOOD IDEA HONEY?" I yelled to my new wife as I strapped on the parachute and walked to the front of the plane. We were going to jump in tandem, and the jump instructor would have his hand on the ripcord of my parachute at all times. If I couldn't open the chute by myself after we jumped, I could tug the ripcord, and he would pull the cord, and the chute would open. As we rode up to 10,000 feet, our instructor explained that there was a reason he had his hand on the ripcord. It was because we were on our way to jump from the world's highest commercial aircraft. It was a DC-10. This meant the fall was faster than usual, and we'd fall at terminal velocity, which is something like 120 mph. "Are you sure this is a good idea, honey?" I said again. "I don't think I'll have any idea of how high we are," I said. "I don't think I'll
After dying, you wake up in the afterlife. The afterlife being millions of years in the future, when hyper-advanced technology capable of bringing people back to life and granting them superhuman abilities has been discovered. That’s where the story begins. The ideas are really interesting, and the writers do a great job developing them. However, it takes a long time for the story to get going. I found the beginning of the manga slow to get into. After you get past the first 25 or so chapters, though, the story is really interesting and full of some great concepts. To the right is the opening page to the seventh manga volume, which was recently released in English by Yen Press. The cover and opening page do a great job getting across the feel of the story, and really got me excited to keep reading. I would recommend reading Spice & Wolf first before moving onto this manga, but I would recommend it in general to anyone who liked Spice & Wolf. If you’ve read it, and are curious, go ahead and read this manga.
The Villain has accidentally drank a love potion that gave them a serious crush on the hero. Desperate to maintain their dignity, and knowing that it could ruin their relationship with their admirer if it got out, they insist that it's nothing. The drink was a Love Potion and it has made them fall in love with their romantic rival. Instead of admitting to themselves and their admirer what they really feel and giving the rival the respect they deserve, they insist that it's just the potion and nothing has really changed. to:
Sailors have always been a superstitious bunch. In the long stretches of darkness and isolation between stars superstitions still run high. So, when the last object on that table turned up in the mess hall after that long and successful voyage there were some very startled men and more than one party called the evening early. In my fifteen years of life I have seen that salt cellar in its bowl many times, yet I have never eaten from it. Instead, I pour my salt on the side of my food in plain view. I think it's the table that's bothering me. There's nothing that offends a rational mind quite like a jumble of numbers. *** On my thirtieth birthday I was transferred to our orbital shipyards, a permanent post as a weapon's systems specialist. No weapons, of course, are involved; they were removed years before. The racks were a backwater of the station's electronic systems and I was expected to do little more than monitor all the various instruments monitoring the ship. The last twenty years of my career would involve little more than reading screens and pressing the occasional
In magic, a sigil is a symbolic graphic representation of a wish, like a drawing. When destroyed properly, the wish comes true. Turns out the “properly” is really hard to do. You have to destroy it in a very precise way, and there’s no real way to do it automatically, so it takes a lot of mental discipline to do it, and maybe hours of staring at a photograph to do it right. So, magic works by basically burning wishes into your brain with willpower until they finally manifest in the real world. They used to think this was all woo-woo nonsense, but now they’ve figured out the brain is capable of this. So, this guy, this monk or whatever, was doing this thing where he would, for example, draw a detailed, intricate, ornate picture of a cave on the ground, and then put up a big, well-made poster of a very similar cave. He’d spend days and days doing this, and would even carve the image into a rock to make it permanent. He’
Write an erotic story using the worst slang terms possible for each act/body part. I sat there, staring at it for what seemed like an hour but was really only a few minutes. " He instructed. During this conversation they were still smiling. I said, "Sure, that sounds like a lot of fun. If this type of visual presentation disgusts you, please do not read any further, just try and imagine. I was panting, screaming, trying to move my legs to stop him. But nobody paid attention to me.
You go back 2000 years with a pistol and one full clip. How do you take over the world? "DEATH!" The crowd's eyes went wide as Xena considered how she might attain the throne of Empress of Rome. She patted Ching-wei's shoulder. "Go tell them what I said, oh loyal servant." The two guards escorted him away and Xena turned her attention back to the crowd. "Does anyone here care to oppose me?" she challenged. A guard raised his sword and approached Xena. She easily disarmed him, knocking him to the ground. Her momentary distraction was all it took for Ching-wei to escape. She saw him running for the exit and gave chase. The Conqueror hurried up to the stone railing, which stood nearly twenty feet high. There was a gaping hole in the stone. She leapt over the side, disappearing into the darkness. Without hesitation, Xena jumped through the hole in the wall. She landed in a deep moat of cold water. She rolled in the slimy, algae-covered mud and climbed to her
A device has been invented that allows the user to gaze upon Heaven or Hell. Hell is terrifying, and those who see it often need counselling. The Voyeur's Curse is a film by Yuta Sadakiyo (2002, 12 min.) Videodrome (Canada 1983) David Cronenberg Michael, a cable TV station manager, seeks to increase his audience by any means possible. When Max Renn, his broadcast engineer, shows him a pirate TV signal that's a violent death channel, they try to make it a paid-for success by producing ever-more spectacular death. The voices of Max Renn and of James Woods (who plays Michael) are also heard in '...in your dreams' (from Epidemic). Waking Life (USA 2001) Richard Linklater This story depicts the hallucinations of a young man who lives alone in a large American city and dreams. He works for a living as a bicycle messenger, but he prefers to live in his dreams, in which he meets intellectuals and is at the centre of vast scenarios that represent our
Write about a person coping with the death of a friend. That Friday night, when Steven got home earlier from work, no one could notice one little thing, a change in his behavior. Steven was different after the deaths of his friends. Every single day he came home with a list of death notifications about his friends on the list. They didn't know why, and for the first week of the death notifications, he couldn't seem to sleep at all. At the end of every day, he just sat on his bed, with a blank look on his face. His parents were worried for him. But his sister, who saw the news, decided to stick to her plan of killing the students at their school. She had already killed three students with no interference, the crime would never be traced back to her. And it wouldn't be as if it was her first time killing. It was her twenty-third murder. Steven lay down on his bed, laying back and closing his eyes. He had a meeting for a few days and now he had no one to come with him, except for his sister. She was a very good
SatChat: What is your favorite thing about WritingPrompts? /r/WritingPrompts has inspired me to take real steps into writing. The subreddit itself has several hundred users who are always willing to help one another. Not only that, but I can be creative with other writing in order to post on the subreddit. The community is amazing. Every post I have seen, and I have read many of them, is so unique and inspiring. Fay: Who is the worst character in your favorite book? It is hard to narrow down a favorite book, but I do have one that is always on my top five list. The book is To Kill a Mockingbird by Harper Lee. I cannot stand Tom Robinson, the black man who is unjustly accused of a crime he did not commit. He's such a lying coward. I suppose, though, that I would dislike any character that I felt was wrongfully convicted for a crime. I'm posting up the text to "Loss." It's not in it's final form. I need to put some polishing on the text, and
Everyone except for your psychiatrist thinks you're crazy. You lie down to have another productive session with Doctor Marshmallow McSnugglesworth, and he starts taking notes like he's reporting for Hustler. Do you think he's taking notes for a legitimate reason? Or do you think he's hoping to read his own name in the headline for the next "Madame Figaro: 'The Psychiatrist Who Loves to Talk Balls'?" … There's another problem with the "doctor knows best" approach. Let's look at the other side of the doctor-patient relationship. Have you ever had to explain to a surgeon why you don't want a certain surgery? If you do, you'll know how that doctor feels when you tell him/her how to do his/her job. When you tell a surgeon how to perform surgery on you, he gets extremely uncomfortable. His expression is similar to the one that dog gets when you're talking to it in front of the vet's office. You say to the surgeon, "What are you doing? Do it this way." And
A man is struggling to sleep due to laughter going on outside his house all night, every night. The problem? He lives alone on a small island off the coast of Japan, and there's only one neighbor to be responsible for the funny business. But while this ghost's antics may be lighthearted, they won't be "so" funny if the truth of their cause is ever discovered. "I want the truth to be revealed," is the hope of this young lady, but you'll have to uncover the ghost's true identity before she'll learn to rest easy. This mystery may not be easy to solve, but if you take your time and pay close attention, the ghost's identity will be revealed in time. Good luck and good haunting!
Most of the Milky Way galaxy is ruled by an interstellar empire, populated by hundreds of alien races. The species of the ruling monarch keeps changing; each time the current ruler dies, a successor must be chosen from amongst the entire population of the Empire. As there are a few thousand of different intelligent species in the Empire, each with their own unique biological process, the current ruler is an inhabitant of the most numerous and powerful race. Every time the ruler's seat is vacant, each of the intelligent species of the galaxy selects one of its best representatives, who will compete in a series of contests of various sorts, usually until there is one winner. The winner is crowned as the next ruler of the Empire, and gets to govern over it until they die, and the cycle repeats. The nature of the individual contests depends on the species: some have a physical contest, in which they use their superior speed, toughness, etc. Others have a different kind of contest. Some choose to participate in both. In any case, the process is not just for the ruling species; it is open to any race that wishes to compete. When
It's been 300 years since Mars was colonized. Now, there is a revolution and the colonies are fighting for their independance. The first colonists were astronauts sent by the international Mars exploration consortium. But over the years, people who were imprisoned for all kind of reasons (religious, criminal, mental) were sent to Mars. A rebel faction was formed by a man named Riddick (Vin Diesel) and is attempting to overthrow the Governor (Colm Feore) of New Mecca, the capital city. Due to it's high crime rate, the city is surrounded by a solar shield that isolates the city from the outside world. Riddick wants to take control of the shield, as well as use it to shut off all power to the city. In the meantime, C.I.T. mercenary William J. Johns (Cole Hauser) is paid a hefty sum by the Governor to return Riddick alive. Johns also has the authority to negotiate a truce between the rebels and the Government. He and his partner, an old Warthog (Nick Chinlund) who is a veteran of the Furyan
Write the letter that you always wanted to, but never did. Dear Mr. "I'm Too Good To Call Or Write My Fans", I have never in my life felt the utter pain of being alone like I did when I came to visit your booth at the Detroit…
The sound of sirens is heard as you watch an ambulance make it's way down your road. You look to see where it stops as you can only see it from the outside. You hear the people inside of it as the door to the back opens. After that a moment later you hear the screaming of the redheaded girl, a scream that is as loud as it is heart breaking. After a few minutes you notice a stretcher coming down the stairs. No more then a few seconds later your mother is led out by a man you assume to be a doctor. As she looks up at you, tears streaming down her cheeks. She looks to have lost a lot of blood but she smiles weakly and says, "Hey hon. I'm going to go take care of our little girl. It'll be okay though. She's gonna be fine. I'm going to go fix her up so she can come home. But I'm not going anywhere. I'm gonna be right here when you get home. I love you." "I love you too mommy." you say, wiping away your own tears
Write a poem or story where the first and last words are both onomatopoeia. Fwoosh, and the lights fell out the sky. (If you do this, please let me know and share the link!)
Starting line for your story: "He wasn't a cannibal. Not exactly..." He was not a cannibal, for he saw exactly what he was doing, and chose it, knowing that someday he might have to pay for it. Begin at the beginning, then go on till you come to the end: Jim Willie is not a story teller, so the reader should know that the best storytelling in this book is supplied by other sources. In simple prose of social thought control: There are certain themes that are the bedrock of contemporary society. Here is the idea of identity. First we discover we are on the Earth and then we discover what we are on the Earth. The two big ideas behind this truth are that we must manage and profit from natural resources and that we must identify the different kind of people so that we can manage and profit from them. He sat and stewed about his theory that the down at the old prison was about to pop out and really give it to them in the open. They sat quietly, hoping he'd take a load off and leave them alone. People have
Your powers only work in the rain. The day she left me, it had been raining. Big, fat, wet, droplets, just like today. I must have walked for miles, crying, and then I started screaming, as loud as I could, and I thought I could feel a thousand raindrops stinging my face. I screamed, and then I cried, and then I screamed again. I don’t even remember how I made it back home. I only remember I’d been walking in a straight line for hours, crying. I must have been walking in circles, because I couldn’t remember getting to the spot where I was standing. I felt like I’d been lost for days. That’s when I saw the blinking light through the trees. I must have stared at it for half an hour before I finally walked toward it. I remember she was holding an umbrella and running. Her hair was all wet. “I don’t know how it happened,” she said. “You left me.”
"You either die a villain, or you live long enough to see yourself become the hero." Moment of Clarity End of the line. I'm done. I'm done with it all. But, I'm not going out without a fight. I may have to use the first grey power that I have ever used, even if it breaks my soul. It may be the last time I speak, and I hope you don't mind if I give one last explanation. The pain comes to you like lightning. As a mysterious light filled the dark sky, the weather was calm. There were no clouds in sight. Rain was no more, and there was no more sorrow. When you looked up at the sky, you saw the sun, high in the sky, smiling down upon you. It was like the sun was saying, "You did it." When the light subsided, the sun was gone. All that was left was grey smoke. The only reason that it was called grey smoke was because the smoke, when it cleared, was made out of a color that was like a pure grey. One second after the lightning came a
(WP) It's January 2015. You're a history teacher, making you fully versed in man's tendency to commit atrocious acts. You take a plane from Amsterdam to Tel Aviv to visit your aunt. A few hours after you board the aircraft, an announcement tells you the pilot has reported an emergency and the plane will land in Amman, Jordan. This happens. If it doesn't, you're flying in a plane that's probably illegal. While anything can be an emergency in hindsight, the ones that actually are are usually pretty important. Maybe your left engine caught on fire; maybe your pilot got a massive nosebleed and can't see out of one eye; maybe an electrical fire is going to incinerate everything. What the pilot decides to announce in these situations may vary, but the protocol is the same. Emergency landing. Engine failure. We've got a good chance of surviving this. He lands the plane, and you walk away with the thrill of a whole lot of adrenaline in your system, a story you will not be able to tell for about a year, and about $300 in free taxi vouchers
Earth did get tidally locked with the Moon and it's only viewable from either North or South America. When Europeans first come to the new world, they find that North and South America is actually an island on an alien planet. The novel ends with Joe Miller being put into suspended animation, so he can be transported to Europa to join his daughter; with all of human-kind about to face a long-range future for the first time, the twin motivations for Joe being the urge to reunite with his child and the urge to escape the repressive theocracy of this new Earth.
It's your tenth birthday and you're finally old enough to get your first Pokémon. On your way to Professor Oak's lab, and owl flies down and drops a letter onto your head! It's from Professor Rowan of the Sinnoh region! He has a favour to ask of you, and he would like your assistance. He needs someone to explore the Pokémon world for him in order to learn more about its nature. Would you be interested in helping him with his mission? Deciding that you need a Pokémon before accepting the request, you continue on to Professor Oak's lab. You catch sight of the professor waving at you and you wave back enthusiastically. His lab assistant is out on the field with him today and the professor is talking about Pokémon moves with him. Excitedly you run up to the two of them. "Hello! Hello! Happy birthday, Jamie!" Professor Oak waves a letter at you. "What's that?" you ask curiously. "Professor Rowan has asked me to give it to you, a letter from him. Oh, this is my lab assistant, Kellyn, by
A man is banished to the wilderness for 20 years. Write his diary entries for his first and last days of exile. I was born to a female hippo. She has a horned phallus and a forked tongue. My family is native to the deepest parts of the ocean. At night, my mother's warm body provided a safe haven for many of her fish friends. One day I met a squid. We were attracted to each other and became inseparable friends. One morning the squid disappeared and I was unable to find her. I eventually became quite depressed. I decided to travel to the surface world. I was very nervous about leaving my home. I packed all of my favorite sea cucumber snacks and said goodbye to my mother. Once I got to the surface, I had to learn how to breath air and how to walk on land. I wore shoes to protect my webbed feet and gloves to protect my fins. The process was slow, painful, and I often tripped. Eventually,
Describe an object within five feet of you in as much detail as possible. A pair of simple black converse lie on the floor of the hallway of a large apartment building. The shoes are covered in smudges and drops of blood, as if someone kicked something over and stained the soles of the shoes. The scene is silent but for the occasional scratching sound coming from one of the walls. It's a dark building with wooden floors that creak with each step. It's a well-furnished building but every resident has gone missing. Their rooms were left abandoned but each has its own story to tell. "Something has grabbed them, perhaps. All except the one you're looking for." It wasn't until you walked through that last door that it was made clear that this is a dream. You wake up with a start, the sound of crunching glass beneath your feet pulling you out of the room. Your eyes scan the dark room, unable to find any signs of life in the black and grey room. There was no one there.
Short story that takes place in a single elevator ride. (This is all on phone so bear with me. Also inspired by a youtube clip called "Cabin Fever".) FADE IN: INT. HOTEL - ELEVATOR. A lone elevator on its way to the 8th floor in a hotel on the 13th floor. We have no camera work, no editing. There's no sound except for the hum of the elevator. It's basically a game of "I never." We start with the woman in the elevator, we'll call her MOM. MOM has a CLEAR COFFEE MUG with a black cup that says "WAKE UP AND LIVE" on it. Her phone is in her hands. She's about mid 20's. She smiles. MOM You know, I used to hate mornings. THE MOTHER stands in the corner of the elevator, looking at the ceiling, half asleep. THE MOTHER (distant)
In the future, technology exists to transfer one person's conciousness to another body, giving identity theft a whole new meaning. Write about the true possibilites and challenges such a technology would bring about. PLOT Policeman Katsuo Maeda has been tracking down a ruthless gangster, the infamous Yakuza boss "The Skull King", for ten long years. He sees a chance to catch him when a deadly fight breaks out between the Yakuza and a rival gang, but then a young female hacker appears on the scene. She hacks into the police database, learning about Katsuo's history with The Skull King, and the hard decisions he made to catch him. What is her motive, and what will happen to The Skull King now that Katsuo knows who he is? PROTAGONIST Katsuo Maeda - A policeman in Tokyo, assigned to the Organized Crime division. In the past he has worked on the Yakuza, but this is the only case he has failed to resolve. Katsuo has a strict sense
"Yes, I'm an exorcist. Even demons and ghosts deserve redemption, a chance to move on and let go." Exorcism of Suzaku "And that is why I am doing this, for this demon. This is my mission and I won't allow you or anyone to interfere!" Exorcism of Suzaku "In truth, I do have my pride. I cannot apologize for this. I will let her go. You can do as you will." Exorcism of Suzaku (to Naraku) "I don't care what you are! Stay away from my friends!" Against the Devas "Let's go, Inuyasha!" Against the Devas "Falling into your trap was too easy. We were too careless." Against the Devas (angrily holding the Gaze of the Predator Sesshomaru (still Tessaiga's true form)) "And now you die!" Against the Devas "How dare you do that to my brother!" (regarding Totosai taking Inuyasha
Describe the great hero of your story only through posthumous anecdotes of friends and family. *" I.... He, um. He came in the middle of the night..." That's better than saying, "He was born one spring night..." That's bullshit. Be as specific as possible. What did the hero smell like? How did the hero feel? How did the hero's features look? As for your villain, imagine he's dead and his brother's telling the story of how awesome he was. *John Moulton's 1742 Political Justice is a required, immediate and in-depth read, for all aspiring social philosophers and all libertarians. *The fundamental cultural approach of the Satanic Venetian faction of usury-merchant finance was to reduce social complexity to its most primitive simplicity. That is, they believed that the laws of culture were biological, not metaphysical. Do you agree with us that Satanic Psychopathic Sabbatean Frankist Satanic Jacobins are War monger Cowards, then you will understand why Terrorism it's the policy of your local government, and that the root
Killing another human now allows you to exchange your remaining lifespan the victim's. Young people live in fear while the elderly plan their attacks. I can no longer wait. I have to live! It will not be easy to fight the elders. My daughter is four years old. I have to return to the water, to fight for her sake. The water will help me. The cold will refresh my soul and let me face death again. I can no longer tell if I am asleep or awake. I do not want to fight my body any more. I will let it take me to death. It is time to open my eyes and start living. Link to the painting in higher resolution Canvas 14 by 17 inches (36 by 42 cm) January 2013 Do you like it? Back
Tell the story of Mitochondrial Eve, but give a sci-fi explanation for why only her descendants have survived. The sky above the port was the color of television, tuned to a dead channel. Remember the TV show Space: 1999? A similar kind of cataclysm caused a human population crash and the survivors were confined to a space station. Of course, one of them died to bring back their child's doll. Why is the story told this way? Do you suppose the population crash will happen in the future? Related Questions Why was the population crash in the TV show Space: 1999? Do you think humanity is doomed to repeat its mistakes? If so, do you think that's a bad thing? If we ever do reach immortality, do you think the world will be better off? Is it a good thing that we didn't exist for most of the time the earth existed? How many of the world's inhabitants would survive a nuclear war? Would it be worth it if only five percent survived? How will you feel when a warhead lands in your backyard
You are a malicious imaginary friend, your host is 19. You feed off of her when she has fun with you. She thinks she's too good for you and you resent her for it. She's spent her entire life building up a high opinion of herself. You try to steal this from her in order to make her seem worthless. Her true opinion of herself is based on how much she can actually do for herself without you. Her true opinion of you is probably that you are an arrogant brat. 2. You are the person with a fear of failure. You are 29. You feed off of her anxiety. She puts her fear into you. She thinks she's a loser and you aren't. She's afraid to fail or to be wrong about anything. She wishes that she didn't have to be wrong all the time. You try to convince her that she's stupid so that she believes that she will never have to feel like this again. Her true opinion of herself is that she's stupid. Her true opinion of you is that you don't exist. 3. You are the perfect person
You are a third party spy who has infiltrated both armies in a battle/war. On the same night, both leaders tell you the same exact thing and tell you to relay that to the other leader. You only know a limited amount of each other, but you have your own views on each other as well. What do you do?
A priest, a rabbi, and a minister walk into a bar. But this is no joke, this is a tragedy. The Lenox brothers are back in St. Louis, and they've got a lot on their plates. The biological father of the twins arrives at the hospital, when he realizes he is also the father of Bella. Jude is struggling to accept that he may not be able to adopt the twins due to possible paternity issues. Meanwhile, Kendall and Greenlee bicker over the future of Fusion, thanks to Aidan's crummy PR ideas. (Does he know that every time he says "uniformed" he's basically using the word naked?) It's not all bad news, though. There's a proposal! Well, a couple of proposals. The moral of the story? If you're going to commit to playing with fire, it's better to be with someone like the person who set the whole thing in motion in the first place. (Because, you know, watching her burn is fun.) Kendall's phone call from Ryan brings an end to her reveling in her "new" life.
Flowers grew where she walked, only to be burned away in the footsteps of him who followed. She was beauty incarnate. For me, she’d become the embodiment of beauty, only to burn into ashes. I knew she was having an affair. There were whispers and snickers, and she seemed as embarrassed as I was. I went to work and told her I was busy. I came home and watched TV and played with the baby, sometimes for hours without speaking to her. And then it was Saturday. I came home from work and the house was still empty. I went into the bedroom and saw her side of the bed had been slept in. I started out for work, but went home instead and sat on the floor, in the darkness, the light from the TV glowing in the dim room. I sat there and hated her. She came in and walked past me and into the baby’s room, and I got up and followed her. I knew she was going to make love to him. I felt the jealousy, and I felt the hatred. I grabbed her from
You are driving down the road when you see a Woman in White ghost hitchhiking. And even though you know she is a ghost, you have compassion on her. You stop to give her a ride. When she gets in your car, she sits there quietly. She doesn't say a word. She just sits there and looks at you. After a while, you start to get uncomfortable. You become more uncomfortable and ask her, "Where do you want to go?" She just looks at you with that blank stare, so you turn on the radio. You turn the radio up full blast, and you are still uncomfortable. So you start to sing to drown out the quiet. But even then, you still can't stand the silence. So you blare the radio even louder until you are on the verge of screaming. And then it starts to rain. The rain falls and falls and falls. Then the Woman in White takes off her coat. Underneath she is completely naked. She looks at you and she starts to crawl on top of you. She is on top of you, moving up and down. You try
You are eating at a fancy restaurant when you suddenly begin to rise into the air. Now, you're floating and have no idea how to control yourself or go down. You're afraid that you're going to hurt the people below you. You’re afraid you’ll crash to the ground and hurt yourself. You’re totally out of control. As you continue to float up, the thought comes into your head that you are going to die. At first, you fight it, but the harder you try to stay in the earth’s gravitational field, the more intense your fear becomes. Finally, you surrender. You surrender to what is and let yourself float up into the air. As you do, you find that you can still breathe and you don’t feel like you’re going to die. In fact, you feel great. You are really excited. Then, a nice angel appears and tells you that you must return to earth. You are sad because you’re having so much fun floating in the air and you don’t want to come back down. The angel reass
- Tell a story through a phone conversation twice: the first time, the reader can only hear one side of the conversation, and the second time, the reader can only hear the other side. - Write a letter to someone's dog, detailing your horrible experience with a cat. - Think of the punchline to a joke, but write a detailed story about what led up to the punchline. - Have a character tell the readers a long, detailed story. Have the characters go on a trip or a vacation, and have them tell of their trip. Have the characters meet up with someone who is a real person, or have the characters encounter someone who is a real animal. - Write a different version of a famous fairy tale by changing the details in it. Write an alternate version of the story of Cinderella. Write a completely different version of Jack and the Beanstalk. "Thesis" What is the thesis of this story? How would you describe the point of this story? What is the message that the author wants to get across? Can you summarize the entire story
A hole in time and space opens up, and you see your younger self looking back at you. You have exactly one minute to tell them what to do with their life that would allow them to become the person you have grown into. What do you tell them? One minute is a short time to make a difference in the life of another. What would I say? Without a doubt, it would be to “believe in yourself.” So often, in our lives, we see the things we want slip through our fingers and we often have the nagging thought that if only we’d worked harder, been smarter, had a better strategy, we could have succeeded. I had the opportunity to work with a young person, just out of college, working as a very successful software engineer. He did not have any intention to become an investor. When he heard that I was interested in investing, he asked me to lunch to discuss his current investing strategy. He told me that he had a plan for retirement and had put almost all of his money in 401K and IRAs. When I
[ CW ] Either begin or end your story with "In my pocket, there was a toothbrush and a human eyeball." I don't know why. But if it gets more compelling, then, in my experience, it will be irresistible to an audience. I've done readings to audiences of up to seven people, so I know it works. JH: The high point of your career? MH: On the 18th of June 2000, the Guardian newspaper's Pico Iyer wrote: "I've been to countless events where people have stood up and read from their own work but I have never known an occasion when I've been drawn in more deeply than when Margaret Atwood reads her own work. . . She seemed to fill every word with such power and precision, such energy and grace. I haven't been so enthralled since I saw Fassbinder's 'The Bitter Tears of Petra von Kant' more than 15 years ago." If you don't know it, see the movie. A masterpiece. I had my pic of Margaret and me with it framed
You're a history major. Your final exam is to travel back in time and successfully pass as a normal, everyday citizen. It's not going to be easy. You'll need the skills of a spy, the knowledge of an historian, the... Free View in iTunes 27 Explicit 216 - Lets Go Camping The trio goes camping. Y'know, like regular people do. Free View in iTunes 28 Explicit 215 - Side Questing Hank goes into town to pick up some supplies. While he's there, he learns some pretty crazy stuff about this land's history... Free View in iTunes 29 Explicit 214 - History Revision The trio learns the terrible truth of their quest. Free View in iTunes 30 Explicit 213 - Hunting for History (Revisited) Back into the cave they go, with even more to find. Free View in iTunes 31 Explicit 212 - Down Into the Darkness The trio begins to delve deeper into the caverns of the past. Free View in iTunes 32 Explicit 211 - Digging Up History Hank hears something outside. The noises of digging. He checks it out... Free
You've been drifting at sea for 20 days, and you're beginning to wonder if leaving the island was such a great idea. Water. There's water all around you, and you don't have a boat or a life jacket. You've been bobbing in the sea for days, getting hotter and hotter. You can barely stand the aches. What should you do? With these words of wisdom from an old story, the message to stay on the island became clear. To stop our fidgeting, our God needed to grab our attention. Once he captured us, he gave us a few words of advice. Don't take on more than you can handle, says Jesus. You need to be smart, balanced, careful about what you commit to. And when he told his disciples this, he knew full well they would be tempted to leave him, to give up on him, to return to what was safe and familiar. Maybe you are, too. Maybe you have a longing to leave the island. To take a long walk and to leave God behind. Here's the thing. If you leave the island, you risk going
The internet is accessible only to the "enlightened ones". You, a "casual", have gained access to the internet. There had been rumors of this internet on other forums, but no one had seen it and it was suspected to not exist. However, now it does exist, and you have seen it. It is however, a bit different than what you might think. What I'm trying to say is that Casuals should be put into quarantine for their own good, because clearly they are exposed to the horrors of playing ranked and might corrupt people from the outside that are not aware of these horrors. You have to realize, he might get the idea that playing rankeds are fun, and then not play other modes, and ruin them as well. He might even ruin ranked itself, because he had seen it, and then everyone will want to play ranked and LoL will become one giant mess of a competitive game. I want to assure you that he is an isolated case and I'm sure that if we put him in quarantine, he will be no threat to the outside world. After all, it
Rewrite a known story so the hero is the villain or vice versa I only did it because I loved her. I told my lies with a straight face. You could have called me on any of it, but you never did. I made her believe in me. She just couldn't help herself. She loved me and trusted me completely. I don't mean to mislead you. I never meant for it to go that far. You're probably thinking I'm an asshole and that you don't want to hear my story, but the truth is, I'm just a man that's trying to do the right thing. So here it is. This is how I rewrote the story of Little Red Riding Hood. The Wolf I killed her. I killed Little Red Riding Hood. I don't know how it happened. I was just doing my job. I had my claws in her side, but I didn't know what to do. It was all too fast. One moment she was chattering away, then she was falling into my arms, and then it was all over. I didn't know what to do
You are a compulsive liar. Convince me you are not. Did I ever tell you about the time we was pinned down by snipers? Snipers! In fuckin' Seoul? There were people dying all around me and you're telling me you went fishing? 'Cause if you did then you are a compulsive fuckin' liar! You are a compulsive liar. Convince me you are not. Did I ever tell you about the time we was pinned down by snipers? Snipers! In fuckin' Seoul? There were people dying all around me and you're telling me you went fishing? 'Cause if you did then you are a compulsive fuckin' liar! Gus: I'm not compulsive about anything! You can call me a liar! Go ahead, I don't care! You know, we went fishing. I'm not compulsive about anything! You can call me a liar! Go ahead, I don't care! You know, we went fishing. Paul: [laughing] You know, I'm sorry, you can tell me what you want and I'm not gonna,
There are 6 people on an elevator. It suddenly shuts down and a voice from the speaker said: The elevator will only function if there is only one person who pushes the button under him. Unfortunately, none of the people know how to push the button. You were sent to investigate the case. It turns out that no one knows how to push the button. How can you make everyone get out of the elevator alive? Assume that you are in the elevator, you can get out only if you come up with a way to push the button.
All my life I had been fascinated with the memories I can recall that weren't my own. "Though I know it's not truly me, it's not a painful memory. It's not even sad. Just a nostalgic look at a simpler time. I can see myself sitting there and see what it is that I'm looking at, but my eyes are drawn by another shape sitting on the floor behind me, shivering in the cool, dark night. Then I see myself look up at this other girl and I get the sensation that something in me knows her very well and is aching for her. That feeling, that knowledge, feels like it comes from my soul, not my mind." He nods once, "This 'memory' is the same way. You get the feeling of knowing something, but you can't remember what. As though there's something you can't remember on purpose. Like your soul knows something your mind can't or won't." "That's why I said the theory was intriguing. It also helps to explain my… uniqueness, if we can call it that." "It
Make a short, bad fanfiction. The next commenter will try to point out its faults. Thomas Wayne looked at the newspaper and circled the black face. It was his business partner, Uncle Phillip. He smiled. The brunette on the front page reminded him of Bruce Wayne's late mother. There was something eerily familiar about her. "I will need an alibi." He looked at the bat costume and laughed. "This won't be a problem." ...was ripped apart by the next commenter. "Batman? Batman? Are you bat-nuts? How can you possibly be making up a character called Bat-" Best of Night Vale - Episode 2: [DOG WHISTLE] Continue >> Maybe they just had one weird encounter and then this was the average experience. Did Dog Boy do something they liked? They hoped so. Dog Boy had a lot of these kinds of encounters. They were one of his many jobs. The one where he has to stand by the fountains. They keep running around. It is very boring work, but he has to make sure the dog can't escape. And they
[ CC ] [ PI ] C764 ~ would really appreciate some crit for this piece. I find it a bit difficult to envision the sound of the guitar in this piece. It plays the same at the beginning as it does in the 3rd measure (1:08), maybe not the chord voicing, but the actual notes are the same. My guess would be something bright, like a Strat through a clean amp with just enough gain. I hope this helps in some way.
You die in a car crash. You wake up in limbo where you must impress Satan AND God with a talent/skilll to get a second chance on Earth. What will your talent be? Reply 666 unfortunate driving skills Someone dies in a car crash, and they have the misfortune to be the only person on the bridge at the time. You have to prove yourself that you deserve to get a second chance at life on Earth. What will you do? Reply 666 ocean someone's house Someone dies and goes to limbo. They have to prove they can do something interesting. They are given a computer, and you have to find them. What happens? Reply 666 THE HOLY FUCKING COMBINATION OF JOKE SO FAR, BECAUSE IT IS SOOOOO WELL DONE. AND ALSO, HOW QUICK ARE THESE, I HAVE JUST ONE MOUTH FOR EATING AND READING CONSECUTIVELY, AND I'VE BEEN EATING OJ. SEE, I
The world as we know it is a case study, and the panel of scientists in charge are debating wether or not to end it. Should we do it? I'd like to start off with a classic – Stranger Things Set in Hawkins Indiana in 1983, the story follows a boy named Will, who goes missing under strange circumstances. A mother, who lost her first child, becomes consumed with finding Will, and an ex-cop who is now a local sheriff, is a big part of the quest. I'm going to go ahead and just talk about the science behind the show. Will's vanishing was caused by an inter-dimensional creature called the demogorgon, who left his world to come to our dimension. The government knows about these monsters and has been doing experiments on them, including pumping a smaller one with radiation and attaching jumper cables to its head. This causes a huge monster to appear in our dimension that wants to suck people out into other dimensions. The town the characters live in is based on one of the stops of the muon to proton conversion line, which would make it a great
The enragement ring. In this world, there is a custom where you must propose to your arch nemesis to hate each other forever. That’s where we find this treasure. An engagement ring. Hiiro collects this with half thoughts that it might be helpful later. With that, their objective was completed, but the female cat beastman was feeling irritated. “Hey you, you’re just going to push all the problems on me huh? The male cat beastman said. “I’ll take them all in! This is the fate of a bride. I’ll take in all the burden for our beloved!” “Stingy!” “What did you say?!” “Ah, I’m fine with it~” “Ara, ara, to think that you’re getting in a relationship with someone who’s going to be stingy. That girl isn’t too bad. Her name is
Create a story with a Key, Castle, Moon, and Flashlight. The Lantern My mother told me, on her deathbed, why she remarried my father. He had asked her to marry him while we were at the beach, two weeks after her first husband had passed. She'd said she didn't think it was a good idea, because we wouldn't be very happy. The answer was no. When she told us she was marrying someone else, we both began to cry. She explained that she didn't have any reason to say no. She hadn't loved him, she just didn't want to marry him. Then she got off her deathbed and said she needed us to go out and get a battery for the lantern because the dark had been getting to her. So I got the battery from the toolbox under the porch, and my little sister followed me back inside with it in her hand. The man who had asked our mother to marry him was standing by the window, talking about how he used to hang out there as a kid. He said he had a crush on her and his friends used to call
You are the leader of an Alien species about to make first contact with humans, with the offer to mentor us past this stage of our civilisation. To decide whether to make contact, the game will require you to play through a simulation of the likely outcome of first contact with an early human society. Will you help them, or leave them to their fate? And will you survive the encounter? The purpose of this game is to communicate some of the issues involved in discussing first contact and human development in general. This is an Interactive Fiction story, meaning it is a text-based game where you have a lot of control over the plot. You'll have to read this story for yourself to find out what happens next!
Imagine reddit existed in 1939. Write what the comment sections would be like when Britain and France declare war on Germany. [ - ] [+9, -2] In 1939, the enemy had not been decided, the royal families were close with Hitler, Russia had decided to side with Germany, and now we see comments saying the same things they said back then. That is why the enemy has been decided. “Mussolini wasn’t all that bad, just unfortunate” “Hitler was the next president of Germany after all” “No need to fight over Poland.” “It is all because of Jewish instigation.” “Who would have predicted the Holocaust.” Good guys are going to win. What I am really worried about are the netizen comments. They are expressing their true views and revealing what is in their hearts. [ +6 ] [ –4 ] 5. [+12, -1] The East was divided by Americans and the
You pray to God, wishing that you will get a boyfriend/girlfriend before you die. He gives you immortality. O Lord in Heaven, I will praise you for eternity, but one more wish, if you can... Please make me have a boyfriend/girlfriend. In the name of Jesus Christ Amen. 14. May God bless the good efforts of all these people who have already made a wish! Note: Every wish is a prayer for the thing that you want. When you say it, you are praying to God and he will help you if you have a faith. You can send this to as many people as you want. The more you send it, the more you get back in return. You will be surprised of all the things that will be coming to you. All you have to do is have faith. That’s it! A name can’t be added to the list. You can just send it to ten people and you will get it ten times. When you get yours, you will know the effort of the person that has send it to you. This is the only
"You had ONE job!" both Satan and God scream at you. "It wasn't that bad." I say in defense. The two look at each other and shrug. "At least we can't be any worse than them." They think aloud. "Also... Is there a bathroom around here?" Satan asks. "You know there is." I reply. God looks excited. "Satan, you need to visit a bathroom?!" he cries out. "It's been a while." Satan replies. I check the wall for the entrance. "Here it is." I say. I put my arms out for them to walk through it. As they do so, they turn around. "You coming?" they ask. "Nope, I'm afraid of this thing." I respond. "No, you're not. I bet you can't handle this thing." God challenges me. "Of course I can." I say. "I bet I can sit in here longer than you." God says. "Wanna make a bet?" I ask. "How much do you want to bet?" he asks. "500!"
Write a dystopia that turns into a utopia. I was in a gaming store on the day the world as we knew it ended in June, 2011, the day the longest game of Magic the Gathering ever played finally ended. There were twenty guys who had been playing a game that would go on for fifteen years. What if a game like Magic didn't end? I don't know how I came up with the idea of using Magic as a backdrop for my dystopia—it just seemed right. Something about people who live for fifteen years playing a game to define a civilization. The End of Magic was about taking a horrible situation and making it into something beautiful. That said, it turned out better than I imagined it could. Elena chose the title of this story for me, because the main character's name is the same as my son's first and middle name. You can find out more about Elena by going to http://elenalittlebird.blogspot.com Of all the different kinds of stories I've written—diversity and breaking out of your shell,
[ TT ] Trials are still conducted by a "jury of peers", but punishment is now meted out "eye for an eye". "You only have one pair of eyes; but you've got two eyes left to spare." [ EY ] [ 22J/112:7/14A ] Eye = Truth. In a recent newspaper article, two dentists recommended that their patients floss their teeth once a week rather than once a day because "most people don't floss at all". Is it any wonder that so few people seem to want to floss their teeth? Or "filter" their online and TV news? (Laughs. Actually, the euphemism has always been "Air / Airplane". As in "This is Air Force 1" - that is, this is the United States president's "Air Force One" plane.) [ KT ] Though it might seem reasonable to find an aircraft with an entrance ramp in the front or the rear for the convenience of the passengers, it seems the President travels with his valet - so "inside" has to be off
You tried to warn them. You knew it would be the end of civilization, but the damn fools would not listen. You are the 5th Voyager." "Your Majesty, I'm not sure what you mean." She stammered, stepping back. "I mean you are human, you are from Earth, but I'm telling you you aren't from our universe. You must be from the future, for you wear the clothes of a Starfleet admiral. You are the 5th Voyager, with the same face as the Voyager who encountered this universe, and died saving it, and my universe. You wore a small golden Starfleet insignia on a silver tunic, right here," he pointed to a spot on his chest. "The Starfleet insignia I wear is on my left breast pocket," she said. "This badge is at the top, above the top line of my collar." "I said badge," he whispered. "The one you wear is an admiral's pin. You will replace the admiral who saved my universe. Who is going to replace you?" "
You are watching TV when your show is abruptly interrupted by the President of the United States announcing to the world that the existence of God has been confirmed via new scientific research and that there will be a national celebration of the event at 4 PM tomorrow. How would you react? Ridicule the President and, later, riot in the streets, burning the White House to the ground. Assume he's joking. Skeptically question the facts. Tell your parents and/or your friends about it. Go see for yourself. Sign up to volunteer for the government's clerical work. Buy a plane ticket to a place in another country where God is believed to exist. Start researching and/or exploring the world of the supernatural. Ignore the whole thing. Voting What is your general attitude toward voting? It's important to participate in the democratic process. I usually do, but not always. I rarely do, and I usually don't care if I do or not. I've
the monster in the closet finally lures the child into the darkness, only to realize something is very very wrong Jenny tapped on the closet door of her husband’s brother’s child’s bedroom. No response. She gave it a little more force, listening again for a response. All she heard was crying. Immediately she reached down and opened the door, only to see a horrific sight. Her 5-year old son, beaten and bruised, laying motionless on the ground. Tears began to trickle down her cheeks as she knelt to her child. In a panic, she tried calling 911, but all she got was the dreaded “all circuits are busy” message. She immediately called her husband and told him what happened. He immediately started to drive from San Francisco to his brother’s house in Oakland. She was alone, but would not leave her son’s side. She could feel herself begin to freeze up. It was cold. Not just a little cold, but scary cold. She pulled a blanket over herself and tried to stay warm
[ wp ] Alien creature is trying to have sex with you but its biology is so bizzare you don't even realize. **As soon as the other does not see you, the one will leave you a message stating "Hey, we all just didn't like your opinions in general." . Every user has there own opinions so they will simply do this until you can't stand it. **{[ wp ]You and the other will talk then suddenly a fly will enter your anus and create a fake human of itself with out you knowing. You get up, turn around, and the fly goes up your anus and eventually die when it thinks its inside you. That's how they reproduce, so that's why they always do it. } **You sit down, and they slowly slit their own throats, pull out their bloody guts, wrap them around your neck and go "lalalalalala" as loud as they can for 20 minutes straight. **The other person is on their phone, because they're busy. So while they're distracted, you glue your lips to their cheeks. They realize this, get
A form of entertainment has been developed where people are brought to the brink of death and then teleported to medics who normally revive them. The first time I read this premise, I admit to being pretty freaked out. The idea of an entertainment based around humans inflicting harm on other humans in order to bring them back to life… I am not a fan of. I’ll admit that the idea scared me off at first. But on a re-read, I found that in spite of how horrific the premise seemed to me on first glance, this is actually a pretty powerful book. This book is written in two parts. The first is from the point of view of the scientist who’s started the company and is well on the way to making his company into the type of global success that will leave his children’s children rich and his legacy will be legendary. The second part is from the point of view of a journalist who’s looking into the events of the entertainment. Both stories unfold at a great pace. The writing is tight and clever. The themes are obviously thought provoking.
Dscribe depression in a contextless monologue. I am tired. Everyday. Days escape me, seconds hold onto my hands as I ball them into fists. My lips, which are trying to move, are white. It feels like my heart has stopped, as if I don’t have a liver and my blood has been thickened with ennui. My eyes are glazed over and I have the constant desire to be drunk. I am worried about the future, or lack thereof. I have never had the time to grieve for the loss of my friend or my mum. All I have felt is broken and alone. I’m running on a gasket. At least, that’s how it feels. I am tired of me, who I am, all the parts of me that make me me, who aren’t me anymore, and all the me’s that don’t exist, in theory. I am not sure what I want, what I need, what I am, or why. I can’t even hold a decent conversation. But I
The universe conspires to make you late for work everyday. Your boss gives you one last chance. This time you're ready... As I dashed into the cafeteria I nearly careened into my boss, who was making his way out. He was wearing his usual austere attire, a bowler hat and a three-piece suit, and looked as if he was trying to keep from laughing. I regained my balance and apologized, and he waved it away as nothing. "I didn't get to see all of it, but it sounded hilarious. I think you've earned another chance." I broke out into a wide grin, and thanked him. "Just keep it clean." "Not to worry," I replied. "I'm planning on keeping it as filthy as possible." I thought I saw him blush slightly. "Okay, good luck. I'll be watching." "I look forward to it." I turned around and strode confidently into the cafeteria. I was ready for this. I strode up to the mike, picked up the newspaper folded on it, and unrolled it. I positioned it so that I could read
You are an elite pickpocket. Describe your lifestyle. Every morning is the same. I get up promptly, at 6:15am. I've been using the same ritual for about 8 years now, I never fail. First I wash my hands and face with cold water, while keeping a close eye on the time. Then I meditate for ten minutes. A quote that I keep in my mind is "Change Your Thoughts Change Your Life". I take that quote very seriously. I know the importance of change. You have to fight through tough times, and changes are the result of that. After meditation I start preparing my breakfast, usually a bowl of porridge. While breakfast is being prepared I listen to music. Sometimes it's jazz music. Other times it's Electronic music. It really depends on my mood. I always give equal importance to all genres. After breakfast I brush my teeth for around 3 minutes. Then I put my hair up in a pony tail. I get ready for my daily workouts. I do 3 hours of exercise everyday. After the workout I shower. I repeat the showering process from the top.
I don't need flesh to be human. I loved the way he held me. His brown eyes were gentle, his hands careful. He would never hurt me. His lips were the softest thing in the world. "Noah," I whispered as I pulled him in for another kiss. Noah She was right there with me and it scared the shit out of me. I pulled her into a hug, putting my face in her neck, praying for her forgiveness. "I'm sorry," I whispered against her neck. She looked at me then, a coy smile curling her lips, I didn't know if I wanted to kiss her or run away. I was scared she would let me. "I'm sorry for pushing you away. I was afraid you wouldn't want me, the real me." The real her was far from perfect. She had to deal with being a demon every day. How did she do it? How could she make peace with it? "Well you got to see it now, not me?" Her cheeks flushed and she cuddled
You are being pulled over by the police. You realize in this moment you are about to become a wanted criminal, because your job only gives you so much freedom. The deed is done, there is no going back. Why did you do it? Because you had to. Is this how the first criminals felt? Was the first criminal simply someone who needed money so they took from someone else? History always has a way of repeating itself. Someone is always following in the footsteps of the criminal before them. What you decide to do in this moment could become a part of history, as well as your own personal story. What would you do? Confronted by the police In the middle of the night you are awoken by the police banging on your door. The front door is busted open and you stand in your home confused and a little bit in shock. You know they are here for you, because of what you had to do. You are brought out of your home and shoved into the back of a police car. You are told you are under arrest for the murder of Joanne Watson. You are taken to the
Write the letter that you always wanted to, but never did. Dear Sister, Our last conversation left a lot of thing unsaid. I see now that it had been my choice to block out the issues that we had as children. Now that I am in my sixties and so are you, our years of estrangement cause me pain. For all the unhappy times I am sorry. I forgive you. I am at peace with my past, and I have learned how to let it go. I write this to you because I must say goodbye. Although I will be around for some time, the end is in sight. At some point soon, I may be leaving the physical world, and when I do, I’ll be leaving some things behind. Please, please, forgive me. Please remember that I love you. I forgive you and ask your forgiveness. You’ve made me so very proud to be your brother. Be well. I love you. Day 318: Honor your deceased ancestors. Share their life stories, and the significance they had on your life and the history
You live in a world where every person receives a superpower on their 18th birthday. You eagerly count down the seconds then shriek in horror as you find out that your powers come with a 50% chance of shortening your life span. Still, your new ability is the only thing that can save your twin brother, who is slowly dying from a rare disease. What do you do? That’s the dilemma facing Alex, the protagonist of the new web series superpowerless. Alex is the focus of the new series, which is produced by the International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences (IADAS). In the first three episodes, we meet Alex and learn how he got to this point in his life. On top of everything else, Alex is also trying to figure out his sexual orientation. While most superheroes enjoy fame and fortune, Alex has to work at a medical center for people with superpowers, alongside best friend, Zoe, who discovered a superpower that allows her to hold her breath for long periods of time. The first three episodes were released today at superpowerless.com.
Black Widow, on a whim starts dating Greg, quirky and funny, but mostly average worker for SHIELD. He is not a genius, he is not stunningly handsome, he is not clever or conniving. He is just himself, and for the first time Black Widow is in love. She worries it is going to go bad, but his sweet calm presence calms her heart as much as his witty jokes. When SHIELD is infiltrated by a spy that has cost them the last mission, and threatens to destroy them all, it is up to her and Greg to do what they can to save everyone. The Unintentional Spy (Blizzard) Cute and sweet, but also a fun ride. I was surprised by how much I loved this one. Blizzard is another Beta Hero. If you have not heard of the term before, google it. It refers to the secondary male lead in a book. He is not the actual love interest, and he does not get the girl. He is a lovely man who holds no malice, no intent of evil, just a sweet and helpful person who you cheer for
Write the letter that you always wanted to, but never did. Dear Michael; I do not even know where to start. I am sorry. I am sorry for everything. When you left, I should have been there, but I was not. I was not. I could not. I would not. I could not put my heart out for you, I could not put my heart out for you again, and you did not do that for me. Michael, I am sorry. I really am. I am. You are the only one I would have given my heart to. It was yours and you took it, you broke it, and left me alone. You told me you loved me and I told you that I loved you too, you broke my heart and I broke your heart. We were inseparable, we were one, and you broke it, but I broke it too. It was already broken. I just broke it further, making it in half. You say I am a whore, I did things that you cannot do
What if God DOES exist, and there is a legitimate explanation as to why he can't hear our prayers? Its energy finally abated, the black dragon spiraled down to where the dragonkin general was. Naruto is a ninja, the ultimate ninja, and is proud of his job. We ask that the Almighty grant them your infinite wisdom and lighten their darkness with your divine Love. Disclaimer: We don't own this. Exorcists: Are You There God, It's Me Exorcist by ZoroTheBlackPanther It's the year of 1993, thirteen years after the Second Great Shinobi World War came to an end. Naruto sneered. "And it's not like I really needed you anyways. No blood was spilled." What about you? He had an expression that would have made anyone who was sane quake in their boots. “This place is abandoned.” The heiress said, her voice cheerful as she looked around the newly-remodeled house. “Do you like it?
You suddenly realize your true purpose in life.... and it's a duty you don't want. ***ALL PERSONNEL REPORT TO YOUR FLEETCOMP OFFICERS*** message that swept through the command, despite the large effort that was put forth by various staff officers to keep their officers well-disciplined and making a coordinated attack. <jake> -05:41 AFAIK, as of last week, when I got back from leaving my daily life, I've still been hearing this. Even had someone in my own fleet tell me it's crap to someone else... No way was my fleet on High Alert. This is a farce. The whole thing is... just a damned farce. <Aeres> -05:41 I don't think so. I don't think it's funny. If this is a farce, I am so very, very sorry for the loss of your ship. I didn't mean to upset you. <jake> -05:41 The TARDINESS... the fact it has been
You were born into the Mafia, only it was hidden from you. At the age of 18, your parents died before telling you about your heritage. You were adopted and raised by your adoptive parents. They were nice people but you always felt like something was missing. One day, you decided to search for your birth parents. You didn't know who they were, but the only thing you knew was your last name was Dangelo. After a year of searching, you found your parents and were reunited. During the month you stayed with them, they tried to tell you about who you were, but you ran. You went back to your life, determined to have your parents out of your mind and life. The only problem was that you were half-Mafia and were expected to become the boss. After a year of fighting, you and your parents decided that you could be the boss when you were 18. When you turned 18, your parents were ambushed and killed. You took over as the boss, then set your sights on the other Mafia families.
You wear a watch that does not work. "Hey buddy, do you have the time?" It took me a moment to realize that the man was talking to me, then I looked at my wrist. It was seven-thirty. With the fingers of my right hand I made the last adjustments, and shoved the screwdriver under the wristband, lifting a thin slice of skin. The adhesive side of the Velcro lifted with the band. I dug a hole in my thigh with the corner of the screwdriver. Quick, painful, and clean. I wiped the blood off on my pants and took my watch off. I strapped it on to my right arm and closed the case. There was not enough space left in the middle of the case to strap my automatic to my chest. I put it into the case with the watch. Then I worked the automatic free of its cloth and wrapped it in the towel. The cut was still bleeding. My friend was watching me. I went back to the mirror and looked at my leg. I wiped the blood off on my pants. I held the gold watch up to
A blind person thwarts a burglar whose broken into their house. Tell me from the blind person's point of view. It all started when I went out for dinner. I was going to meet my friends. When I got to the restaurant it was closed. My friends were not there so I called their house, no one answered the phone. I decided to head back home. I walked back home with my guide dog. When I got home I went inside. I called my friends, still no answer. I heard someone in the house. I knew that something wasn't right. I picked up my cane and felt for my cell phone. It was gone. I shouted, "Who's there? Who's in my house?" No one answered. I called the police and waited in the living room. A few minutes later I heard glass shatter, someone broke into my house. The dog sensed someone was there. "Get out of here!" I yelled. I heard footsteps coming toward the living room. I was cornered. "What do you want?" I asked. No one answered me. I waited for someone to speak.
In the dead of night a young girl meets an intimidating man with severe scarring. After the confrontation the man is the one who is afraid.
[ CW ] Write a story that begins with "I shouldn't have said [ yes/no ] to [ him/her. ]" I should have said no to him. [ CW ] Have a character tell someone else about the weirdest thing that's happened to them while they were on a trip. The most weird thing that's happened to me on a trip is my sister shoving taffy in her vagina. [ CW ] Have a character start in one of your stories and do nothing but say something mildly interesting for five lines. This could be an animal or inanimate object or something. [ CW ] Have a character tell another character how annoying they are. [ CW ] Write a story that has at least 5 sentences that include alliteration. Don't have to be in the same sentence, you can spread it throughout the story. This could be a blessing or a curse. [ CW ] Have a character try to solve a dilemma that's obviously outside of their control. Maybe he or she can just accept the inevitable. [
[ IP ] So It Begins... Klaxons blared throughout the hallways of the ship, awakening its crew. “ Wormhole activation! ” called a warning voice over the Klaxon. “ Full alert! ” A yellow-haired man of average height and slight build emerged from the bunk he had been sleeping in and opened a compartment in his nightstand. A pair of black tinted glasses fell out. He slipped them on, grabbed his mobile comms unit and tapped a few commands. “ We have engaged the external wormhole drive. All teams are prepared and standing by. ” He paused a moment to listen to a report from another part of the ship. He looked around the room, a wave of his hand altering the lights, and made his way to the doors leading to the bridge. He slid past a series of security scanners and moved towards the command chairs at the back of the room. The crew rose in respect, saluting him. The Captain tapped the arm of the chair and slipped in, sitting down. “ Let’s hope this time they sent enough to make
The Allies have lost the Third World War. Pres. Maxwell's speech after the Allies loss of World War III: My fellow Americans, it is a sad day for all of us. The world as we know it is now only a memory, erased from the history books by the terrible Third World War, brought upon by the aggressive, imperialistic communist Russian hordes. For now the light of freedom has been extinguished from the world. Communist oppression has settled over the planet like a massive black cloud. With the Allies' surrender, I am now compelled to sign a joint capitulation with the Kremlin and the Korean People's Republic. As we all know, President Kim Il-Sung has fulfilled the destiny of his father, the Eternal President Kim Il-Sung, to be the leader of the Korean People's Republic. And I am proud to sign this document that will ensure peace for the next 50 years. In accordance with the terms of the joint capitulation agreement, Korea will get half of the Earth's landmass. But because I am a man of honor and have lived up to my campaign promise to bring world peace, the Koreans will
A sketchy salesman attempts to sell a perfectly normal sword to the hero, passing it off as the sword of legends. "Fair wanderer! Wield this one as you wield none other!" This is even a plot point in Xenoblade Chronicles X. A monolith-esque alien system decides that, when the humans arrive on Mira, it'll pick the 10 best to be leaders...and the others will have to die. Web Comics Web Original Western Animation Other
The average income of a person is displayed above their head Every person in the world has a number. A number that shows how much cash you make. The lower the number, the higher you are on the food chain. Also, your number is displayed above your head for all to see. So, if you see someone in a tuxedo with a high number, the ladies may think he is "welfare". If you see a well dressed gentleman with a high number, you can be sure he will get respect from people in higher positions. This way, people can judge you by your looks, without knowing anything about you. People will see your number, and then you will act accordingly. Just as it was in this society, there are big and small numbers, and sometimes low numbers have higher prices. And just like it was in the Wild West, people with low numbers are discriminated against. How do they prevent rich people from coming in to the ghetto and throwing money at the people there? Obviously this would imbalance the game. Well, the people with the highest numbers have certain privileges. They get to enter the higher class areas (
[ EU ] Write the opening exposition of a bold new Zelda game. Long ago, the land of Hyrule was beset by a terrible Demon King. The young princess Zelda, ruler of the land, commanded her 6 sages to seal away the Demon King in his temple. However, before the Demon King was completely sealed, he managed to fragment his heart, which imprisoned his anger and hatred into 6 Shadow Hearts. The 6 sages could not destroy the fragments, and so sealed them away into crystals of light. Many years have passed, and in a small corner of Hyrule, 2 young boys found the crystals containing the Shadow Hearts, and began to battle with a Shadow Beast sealed inside. The beast managed to escape, but was eventually sealed within the evil wizard Ganondorf, a Gerudo man whose magic skills far exceeded those of the sages. He left the province, and began his quest to find the remaining Shadow Hearts, in order to finally destroy them all and obtain true power. He was determined, however, to find the last fragment within the sacred Golden Power, the ancient relic that gives the royal family its power and
There have been reports of serial-killings\serial abductions of janitors "Another one, Constable?" "Yes, Inspector. Another one." She pointed to the bloodied corpse on the floor. "This one has been here less than ten minutes, sir." "Only ten minutes? You mean it's still warm?" Constable Green banged his fist on the control panel. "Someone's beat us to it, Inspector." "So it seems." the Inspector admitted. "It happens all the time." Green replied. "I don't know why they can't just leave the bodies alone." "No signs of a struggle?" "No signs of anything, Inspector. It's almost as if they walked in and bashed him over the head." "But how did they get past security?" "Must've hacked the gate and CCTV, Inspector." Green suggested. "It's a new model." "What gate?" asked the Inspector. "The gate out front. No one can go in or out unless they're cleared. That's why this station is our main base for our cybercrime unit. It's why we have
Later in your life you discover that the omniscient supercomputer that directs society determined that you should have been eliminated for the betterment of mankind." "I'm not a huge fan of that plan," replies Donna. "Look, I wasn't a huge fan of my middle school social studies class, either," quips Romano. "At least you got the upgrade." "Very funny. What I meant was the time compression aspect is supposed to be kept a secret. If we were not able to compress a one year mission into a day or so, why don't we just tell everyone it's taking us so long?" "Because it's not feasible. No one would believe it. What would they say about the videos? They'd say, yeah, sure, I know you had a couple of trips to the 20th Century, but it was all part of the background processing and you had nothing to do with it." "It would be so much easier if we just used a wormhole." "Yeah, I know. I love those things. Take me
Start off like a horror story akin to something out of /r/nosleep, but finish it with someone stealing your Kool-Aid [this exact idea was also used for day 1, so don't bother]. Bonus points if it also references Noob Noob's family history (hint: It's complicated). "13 ghosts, 13 doors, 1 room..." "Taygon wanted one of those good smelling Orange Yogurts for his birthday, and as his parents they would do their best to help him out." "A day in the life of /u/newleafstuart" Your favorite story/picture is coming to the 20/20 episodes of /r/nosleep "I live in a bad area of a bad city and as a result I've got to be pretty self sufficient. One time I locked my keys in the house and had to call 911. I didn't want to mention this online because I was worried that they'd send a squad car, but I was only a few houses away from the precinct, and it turns out that the officer
"Please kill me" **911, what is your emergency? ** *Oh god, please help me. Someone is shooting up the school. ** What?! What's your name? **I'm Chris. **What's your last name? **Smith. **Chris, I need you to keep your voice down. ** Why? **Listen to me. I need you to stay calm and barricade the door. **I can't, the door is blocked. **Listen to me carefully. I want you to get your desk or your chair. **Okay. **Now, I want you to wedge it under the door and place something heavy on it. **Okay. **Chris, listen to me, okay? ** Okay. ** If he gets in, he'll be able to break through. **He's not getting in. **Listen to me, okay? ** He's not getting in. **Chris, listen to me. ** He's not getting in. **Chris, listen to me! *Jesus Christ. **Sir, you need to leave the area! ** They'll be alright! **We need the police
Aliens seeking mind expanding substances stumbles across Earth and gets addicted to... "Stop eating so many fucking pistachios Frank!" A man in blue Speedos begins spouting words of wisdom at a rather large snail making his way up a tree trunk. "Wow, you can climb?" asks Frank before eating more pistachios. He is the most fascinatingly insane person on the planet, which is why you should absolutely go and listen to him, starting here. Classic Ron Paul Music Video: 9/11 & the Phantom Flight 175 - Vol. I The "Classic Ron Paul Music Video" series is a collection of videos created and edited by TonaBarco in 2008/2009 for the Ron Paul Revolutionaries Youtube channel. The three volumes contain a unique fusion of 9/11 Truth content intermingled with fantastic musical selections, cinema-quality graphics and other digital special effects, and highly informative and entertaining spoken word vignettes that make for an engaging and stimulating viewing experience for the 9/11 Truth community and beyond. 9/11 Truther arrested in front of U.S. Capitol Building -
Eight Writing Prompts! It is getting dark in the hospital room; the winter afternoon is lapping at the windows. A thin covering of frost whitens the panes of glass. The man on the bed is nearly dead; the old men in the nursing home are dying; a child is at home with whooping cough. There is a small, leaden key hidden somewhere in this poem that will open a door into the heart of what it means to die; the door will be swung open in the first line and then the poem will have something wonderful and new to offer for the rest of its length.
As I ran away in a full sprint I could her screaming behind me. “ Remember! You made me a promise! ” I looked over my shoulder and saw her screaming “ I am going to see you at school tomorrow! ” I panicked as I reached my bike. I ran and stopped at the bottom of my driveway. “ Oh god, please don’t let her come after me tomorrow. Please god! ” Chapter Three The bell rang and I didn’t need to be told twice to get to my first class. I walked in and my friend Allen looked up. “ Hey, Alex! You need to go to the office and turn in your late pass. ” I nodded and headed to the office. Once there I handed her the slip and the assistant gave me a passing grade. I walked back to class and once the teacher looked up at the clock I would fall back asleep. I woke up and was being shaken and told to wake up. I looked over at Allen and he told me we had two minutes left of class. “ Allen,
The year is 2180. Humanity has begun spreading across this galaxy. Yahweh, the Judeo-Christian God, after watching for them for thousands of years and sending many missionaries to inform them of Him, decided that enough was enough. He decided to take a more hands-on approach to their salvation, one last try before He abandoned them. He assembled a very special team of space missionaries, among them Moses and Noah. Unfortunately, the team never made it to Earth. They got caught in a meteor shower and forced to make an emergency landing on the planet of Krypton. And so, their mission on Earth would have to begin on Krypton. This was an important planet. This was the source of much of the technology they use, including their weapons, and it was a godless place. By eliminating the corruptions of this planet and showing its people a better way, they could rid this world of some of the injustices that plague the galaxy. Krypton was filled with rampant crime and injustice. Every citizen, young and old, had committed some sort of crime at least once. Sex crimes
Dreams do come true, at the age of 18 everyone can choose whatever job they want. Describe this new chaotic world we live in. I graduated high school at the age of 18 and joined the military a year later, which means I could get my career started earlier than most people. When you look at the world today we are no longer under the old fashioned, suit and tie lifestyle. We are in the era of technology, we’ve moved forward to this new digital world and everyone is being challenged to reinvent their careers. This means being flexible and able to do so many different things. This change is very demanding on our young people today, I have a tremendous respect for young people, because to be able to adapt to this new world, you must be a very hard worker and have an open mind. Tell us about your career. I’ve always been a hard worker. After graduating high school I joined the army. After being in the military I decided to become a truck driver, because I loved the challenge. From there, I went on to work in construction. Then a
In the realm where souls reside before we're born, everything is pretty great. There's no poverty, no one wants for anything, everyone knows their purpose, and there's a spirit of cooperation that keeps everything running smoothly. People often stay in this realm in between incarnations. But when we incarnate, we go to Earth, where everything is a bit less grand. From an evolutionary point of view, the spirit realm is meant to develop us to make us better candidates for what we get when we're reincarnated. So when we die, we go back to the spirit realm. We're there until we're born again. As one of my students pointed out, it's a bit ironic that we're born into a world of contrasts: we're born poor, naked, and dependent on others, but we die richer than the richest king. But while we're here, we have to work for it. This is the big lesson of the spirit realm. While we're here, we can learn to have more and to feel less, but to get to the point where we have everything we want and
"Why are you a spider?" They ask. "Why aren't you a spider?" You retort. "Why are you a spider?" they repeat. "Why aren't you a spider?" you ask. This goes on, forever. Each of you asking the same question, until infinity. You feel like you've fallen into one of the dreams you had in your dark, dark time. Your dark, dark time when you'd wake up every morning and think you'd make a huge discovery. Something that would change everything. Something that would make people look at you and go "wow you're so awesome you just invented fire or agriculture or whatever." That was many years ago, but you still don't have that discovery. It's too bad. You leave the store. You leave the building. You leave the city. You walk, and you walk, and you walk, and you walk, and you walk. You stop. You look around. There are no more buildings, no more trees, no more animals. Just flat, endless desert. You see no other human beings
[ CW ] "A flash of light, a puff of smoke, and she was gone." A flash of light, a puff of smoke, and she was gone. A flash of light, a puff of smoke, and she was gone. A flash of light, a puff of smoke, and she was gone. A flash of light, a puff of smoke, and she was gone. A flash of light, a puff of smoke, and she was gone. A flash of light, a puff of smoke, and she was gone. A flash of light, a puff of smoke, and she was gone. Ringing [ CW ] Ringing Ringing Ringing Ringing There was nothing special about her looks. She was too thin to be called beautiful, but she looked as if she'd survive the impossible. There was nothing special about her looks. She was too thin to be called beautiful, but she looked as if she'd survive the impossible. There was nothing special about her looks. She was
A person who is addicted to murder is trying to fight their urge to kill. Reader, do you want to know why I can not control my urge to kill? Because I am addicted to murder. If I am not addicted to murder I would not be killing. This article is not a smart ass statement to offend or insult my readers or any organization in any way. This is only an expression of the author. In his book No More Words, Thompson takes the position that many murderers will tell him that they enjoyed the "thrill of the kill." That is to say that there is a sexual connotation to murder and perhaps it is a form of lust. However, he also writes in the book, "Our society offers many outlets and alternatives to vent our stress and lustful frustrations without having to resort to murder. I personally like to run and workout and enjoy a good movie or even go shopping or go out on a date. I am not the murderous type. However, if I did have the desire to kill I do not believe that I would use a gun or a knife. I would most likely use something more dangerous
You are a well-loved and extremely popular food cart vendor in your city, a city that happens to be pretty populated by superheroes and supervillains. Customers are flocking to your food cart, but it’s making some of the local bad guys jealous. Each night they try to put you out of business, and you try to evade their assaults. Who are you? What is your food cart business’ name? What is the name of your city? And who are the rival food cart owners? Cheat Day: When a customer is thinking about Cheat Day, they are thinking about the last day of a diet. The customer is fantasizing about what they can eat on that day. The customer is someone who has been on a diet for a while. For some reason, they have been consistently thinking about the final day of the diet, and what they will do on that day. What is the customer’s name? What is their last name? What is their first name? What is the customer’s favorite food? What is the
Two men on death row try to creep each other out from adjoining cells. I don't know why there is a window. But there is. Two men on death row try to creep each other out from adjoining cells. I don't know why there is a window. But there is. **Art Film Screamland The tale of a group of friends touring various haunted sites in California. By most standards, this one is pretty boring, but it looks really good. Screamland The tale of a group of friends touring various haunted sites in California. By most standards, this one is pretty boring, but it looks really good. ***Art Animated Shorts Gone Five minutes of superbly fluid animation in which a woman goes about her day in a city, each movement and scene made with the fluidity of a dancer. A great short. Gone Five minutes of superbly fluid animation in which a woman goes about her day in a city, each movement and scene made with the fluidity of a
You are a "hero" in a fantasy world, but as you "adventure", you are slowly realizing YOU are the antagonist. I finished it and really enjoyed it, though it's an odd game, one part RPG and one part text adventure. I actually beat the game first on a good ending, then I went back to see what the "bad" ending was like, and apparently I wasn't exactly the nicest "hero" either way, but at least the bad ending was a bit more interesting... This game had me laughing at times, and really gives you an idea of how fun it would be to be an asshole of a hero... now I want to see what the ending of Skyrim would have been like if I had sided with the dragons from the start instead of playing the role of the idiot who thinks a man with a stick is somehow supposed to kill a fire breathing lizard with wings. Next up I want to try a story game I downloaded on Steam, Kentucky Route Zero, which was created by the same guy that made the games in the Night In The Woods series,
A serial killer has found his next victim and begins his normal routine of peeking through windows and popping up in mirrors, looking for that rush he gets from knowing someone is watching. Nick, being well-liked and one of the good guys, finds himself in the role of hero as he tries to protect the young girl from the stalker. Killing Spree is a perfect stand alone novel in the Game Changers series. It reads well as a standalone novel with no outside knowledge of the characters required, but you really do feel like you are reading a part of the story of the earlier books. Any fan of scary novels will find this one a winner. The language of the novel is brutal. The reader will read phrases like "drained the motherfuckin' blood out of the bitch", "I saw something that kinda scared me, so I dragged her in there and tried to mess with her a bit", "I tore off her clothes and knotted up her hair" and many other disturbing, violent, perverted phrases. I have to give high points to the author for being brave enough
A hated politician is secretly a beloved superhero They hate my human but love my mask, I am the human condition magnified. There isn't much room in a prison cell for introspection. Looking at your shoes in prison can be a profound experience. But my mom sent me a pair of rubber-soled sneakers that were super comfortable. Everything felt easy with those shoes. When the day is done, I like to unwind by thinking of things that aren't. This job is a fucking joke. Why would you give it to me? I'm the guy who's always fucking up. That's a dick move. I'm kind of scared about the day when they take that cock ring off. My father always said, "Nihilism and bad jokes are a bad combination." Maybe that's why I'm so nihilistic. When I was younger, I tried to build a time machine. I used to steal from younger me. Because I'm a bad person. If I'm not selling out, what am I doing? I get older and colder, every year. Why be good? Maybe it's all going to be okay
You are a mother writing your child a letter about why you disowned her Jodie – I hope this letter finds you in perfect peace.” John Waters “I’d like to apologize on behalf of my gender for Jodie Foster being such a man-hater.” Woody Allen “A 14-year-old Jodie Foster makes Shirley MacLaine look like the Under-achiever of the Decade.” Jodie Foster, National Enquirer, Feb. 28, 1992 “I don’t like lesbians because I’m afraid of them. They always seem to have a look about them that just turns me off.” Jodie Foster “When I was about six I had fantasies of being an orphan. I thought I would be very chic and glamorous. People who didn’t know me would say, ‘How did you get to be so chic? Who takes care of you?’” Jodie Foster
[ CW ] Write a serial killer's to-do list I took some inspiration from a well liked TV Series. **Edit: ** Formatting update Created a small application to track who you give food to in /r/Random_Acts_Of_Amazon I made a small program to help track who you give a gift card to on Reddit, it also helps you figure out what to write in the description.
Your hands have gained sentience- what do they do? "I call him Lefty" "Lefty? That's an uncreative name" "Well, I've got two of them, so they're named Left and Righty. I'm not an uncreative person!" What kind of hickeys are you going to get from everyone now that Lefty has come out of the closet? There will never be a self-portrait of Lefty. That's way too much like narcissism. It would be like a mirror! Do you have a lot of friends? I would not call my self a "people person" so much as a "people voyeur". I think people watching is an excellent sport. I'm not one to form long-lasting relationships, so I'd probably be considered pretty anti-social. However, I have a lot of the same interests as my dogs, so we like to hang out and goof off. Can your legs cross each other? Yes! This is called a calf-gato. I can cross my
"At first they came back with nothing, and then they didn't come back at all." "At first they came back with nothing, and then they didn't come back at all." 8. "Don't swallow the gum" "Don't swallow the gum" 9. "Don't swallow the gum. I told you that already" "Don't swallow the gum. I told you that already" 10. "Eat your soup, Miss...before it gets cold" "Eat your soup, Miss...before it gets cold" 11. "Eat your soup, Miss...before it gets cold. Don't want you to get sick now." "Eat your soup, Miss...before it gets cold. Don't want you to get sick now." 12. "I got good legs." "I got good legs." 13. "I got good legs. I'm going upstairs and do some exercises." "I got good legs. I'm going upstairs and do some exercises." 14. "I'll finish the crossword.
Lost life The general rule in this generation is that men were not allowed to be in the room while the midwives were helping the woman in labour. These midwives were women who had been training for many years in their village, and they delivered thousands of babies. They knew what to do. In Genesis 3:20, we read how God had declared to the woman: "I will greatly multiply your pain in childbearing; in pain you shall bring forth children. Yet your urge shall be for your husband, and he shall rule over you." The number of miscarriages was about the same then as now, but women were expected to accept these losses in a stoic way. Man is just as stupid as he ever was, except that God has less power over him now. But there is a deeper loss. In Leviticus 12, God introduced this further penalty: "If a woman has conceived and borne a male child, she shall be ceremonially unclean for seven days, as during the days of her menstruation she shall be unclean. On the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised. Then she
A 25 year old reacts to his girlfriend admitting that she is pregnant. A true, honest-to-god reaction. He looked hard at her with his own piercing eyes and said, "well, we're not getting married." It was so raw, you could see the fear in her eyes. It was emotional and awkward, and she ended up giving the baby up for adoption. It wasn't until this whole Kaitlyn thing, that he found out he was, in fact, a father. Apparently, the girl who he got pregnant talked her parents into the adoption because she didn't want to tell D-Hamp she was pregnant. If you've ever watched him on screen, you can understand how someone may not want to go to that level with him. However, the heart wants what the heart wants, and now, a now 22-year-old woman who lives in Texas is the mother of his child. The entire situation was very strange, and D-Hamp tried to give it the ol' college try when it came to talking to his kid on the phone, but he is just not
You are a professional pickpocket. You've just picked someones pocket only to discover that the thing you have stolen is truly horrifying. He looks like a normal man on the outside but as you look closer you notice a strange tattoo, like a weird mixture of a fish and flower. You have to get this thing off of you before people start looking at you strange. That is if you survive the night of course. You will have to pick other pockets to get enough money to get a replacement but you better hurry because it looks like the thing wants to get out. Latest version: 0.2.1 The game is updated regularly and can be downloaded here Thank you for trying my game and if you have any feedback I'd love to hear it. Aidan(Me), Zach(Art), Jose(Game Dev), Arthur(Writing)
your wife is four months pregnant and your terminal illness will take you in less then two months. Write a letter to your unborn child. To my wife Dear her, She has never seen my face or heard my voice but it is you she looks for each day. To see the picture of me in your hand as she cries out for me each night has broken my heart more times then I can tell you. But I do love her. From the moment I met her I knew she was a beautiful girl but I never imagined the love that would grow inside of me. Her smile fills me with joy and her touch does things to me that I don't understand. I'm glad you're here. I'm happy you're here. But please, oh God, please, baby, forgive me. I know I'm not here to be a part of your life but I want to. I will love you with everything I have and everything I am. But I'm dying. I can't stop it. I've tried and I have failed. Please remember me. Know how sorry I am that I
You live in a world where every person receives a superpower on their 18th birthday. You eagerly count down the seconds then shriek in horror as you realize you’ve received The Worst Superpower Ever. It sounds like a joke, but to your dismay, it’s not. You ask around to learn more about the predicament. And you learn that your powers are relatively useless; being able to create bubbles is something many of the other powers outshine. However, you learn about a special superpower: Telekinesis. You know nothing about it except that it’s used in terrible comics like Marvel X-Men and that its users are somehow the most powerful in the world. You’ve often dreamed of getting that power, but you have no idea where to start or how to go about it. You long for the day when you can learn Telekinesis, but in the meantime, you use your current powers to help others and gain some experience. Then one day, you get it. You succeed in doing the impossible, becoming a master of Telekines
You have developed and ability to see how people will die when you look at them. Your entire life you avoided pictures of yourself, but today you look. What you see has been with you for as long as you can remember. The girl is an actress. Her fingers are delicate and her eyes are hard. You have seen her in your nightmares before. The man with the gun is your oldest friend. He is threatening to murder your family, and you have no way of stopping him. Your tears do nothing to save your mother. Your struggles and the blood you let drop into the ocean are only enough to save your father. You flee to a crowded street. The police will never find you in the crowd. The gun becomes a pendant around your neck. It weighs heavier than the necklace you wear every day. A single frame flashes in front of your eyes. There is no way to know whether it is your own fate or the woman's fate. There is no way to know whether it is real. <div class="footnote"> *A flash
Today, you went into the room your parents told you to never go in. It was staring at me again. The large square patterns of the wallpaper danced in rhythm with the vibrations of the hum. You searched for the source of the voice. Looking in the closet, you find nothing but clothes. Then, a disturbing thought enters your mind. The voice is a dream. It is a dream. The room was empty. You leave the room; closing the door behind you. The next day, you decide to tell your parents. "Mom, Dad, there is a room in this house that isn't supposed to be there. It's like a little kid's room. Can we make it into a bedroom for me? I'll paint it whatever color I want. It'll be really cool! You can put a lock on it, but I know it will be a boring little closet. But, you can put old baby stuff in there and toys that you're done with in case I get a baby brother or sister! Well, I'm off to play now!" As you are walking away, you hear your
