Aliens visit earth and are fascinated by other animals but find humans completely unremarkable. Hello, let me begin this report by stating just how thankful I am to have been sent to Earth. It was truly an eye opening experience and without your guidance and funding would have been utterly impossible. Let me give you an overview of how Earth functions, and I think you will be surprised to find that it works very similar to our planet. There exists a large number of organisms going through one stage or another of change while they fall into their respective places on the planet. The conclusion of my research has confirmed what we have believed to be a universal law called net impact theory, which can be described in two parts: 1. a species can only exist if it has a net positive impact on its environment. 2. Species' which detract from their environment will go extinct. My research will hopefully continue to discredit the theory which this universal law replaced - survival of the fittest. Earth has many
You possess the ability of persistent lucid dreaming. Accompanied by a strange man/woman, together you build a world you revisit every night. One day you see them at a coffee shop. You immediately recognize each other. You know that moment when you're lying awake at night, wondering if The Matrix was just the machines trolling us and this is all a simulation, plot holes and all. Sitting across from her I had one of those moments. Not one of our dreams. Our dreams had more lasers and robots and sometimes a t-rex. But still not real. "You look like you do in the dream" "Did you expect me not to?" "I didn't think you were real" I didn't think she was real either, but I felt like I shouldn't say that. One of those double standard things. "So what now?" Good question. What do you do? The right answer was probably go our separate ways. 9/10 people who've fucked with a good thing say you shouldn't fuck with a good thing. But of course we had to push
Write the third episode of non-existant series. Make us curious about what happened before episode 3, and what happens after. The only sounds that I could hear were howls. And I could almost hear the Wolf's prowl. - The world seemed to be at a standstill. In the dead of the night, there I was, alone. I had no idea if my actions so far would bear fruit or not, or what I was about to do next. It seemed that I was the only one in left in this sector, however unlikely it may have been. But then I heard an outcry, a declaration of war. - I knew that just a couple stood no chance, We were intimidated just by
When you die, you don't go to the afterlife of you're religion, you go to the afterlife of the religion whose tenets you followed most closely, knowingly or not. I turn the corner anger and stress churning through my veins. There it is, the end right in my eyes. A barrel is sticking two inches from my face and all I hear is a click from behind the gun. Time freezes, my eyes freeze I cant move or look anywhere its like a horrible horrible dream. God help me I thought. "That's my name don't wear it out!" Time unfreezes and the world falls around me like a neatly hung curtain "What the fuck is going on!" a humble, bass riddled voice answers "I am so happy to meet you Cameron." "Stop I can't. Please." I am shaking now the sweat on my neck is ice cold. "Relax son, you are alright. So Cameron Diaz you're mom was a Catholic and you're dad was Jewish. What are you?" I hear pages turning all around me. "Ha, Cameron congrats and welcome to FSM Heaven!" "Oh shit." All of
A world where the colonial powers were cultists of eldritch gods instead of Protestant Christians/Catholics. *Wibble, wibble wibble* "Yes, yes, of course I know that!" Spoke the cultist, to the jar of shimmering green jelly. *Wibble wibble. Wibble WIBBLE! * "Okay! Get off my back, jeez." Spoke the cultist, now walking to the nearby village. This village had been accepting of the new colonists, but the cultist wanted to wait for the village population to increase ten percent, whereas the angry jar wanted to convert the village now. "Hello villagers! I bring gifts of exotic fruits, and the beliefs of my people!" spoke the cultist to the small crowd. "This jar is part of our beliefs. We believe that in times of trouble, a great power will be released to protect those who believe. We also believe that it contains great knowledge that it reveals to a select few." "Chief! Other colonists are attacking! They are attacking the friendly colonist camp. They say we must cover
You wake up in a strange bed in a mysterious but somehow familiar room. After a few moments you realize you are four years old again. I am jolted awake with a burst of pain in my right arm. The last thing I remember was walking home after last night. I had just left the bar, as I was celebrating my 21st birthday a week late with my friends, and I was crossing the street. I am in my old bedroom, so I must have gone to my mom's house, given that is is closer to the bar than my own house. I sit up in bed, and my room looks different. I look down at my arm, and it is in a cast. The last time I was in a cast was when I fell out of a tree on my fourth birthday. I look around my room. On a shelf in the corner are a row of cards. "You're Four!" one reads. "Happy Birthday, Superhero" another one decorated with images of Spiderman says. As I look around, I realize that something changed. I get out of bed
A peaceful alien race is besieged by another race in the same galaxy. As their last planets fall and their home-world comes under threat they do the unthinkable. They ask for aid from the only known creatures more brutal than their foes in exchange for FTL technology. Humans accept the deal. 78 seats sat around the table. all of them were our leaders, our military the greatest minds our species had, were assembled for these negotiations. Our planet seemed lost. we were relegated to a tiny slice of land no bigger than the human continent of south america. the fight the battle and the war were lost. and in our moment of weakness we reached out to our only hope. neither a friend nor ally but a shot in the dark through the eye of the needle while the storms of war errode everything we have. our only hope was humanity a ruthless and brutal species which is split into many small tribal factions. hard
You are watching TV and the program is cut off by an emergency broadcast. The presenter says that there is a massive meteor coming for earth and there is no chance for survival for humanity. What do you do in your last 3 hours alive? I decided for the apocalypse that I would walk out into the street and just sit. Sit and wait for some heavy vehicle to rend my body asunder. It was all over. One by one they came, the others. From houses and stopped trucks they came and looked upwards. They sat with me, some gesture of solidarity perhaps. The lonely, the useless, the forgotten; together we sat on that fine July morning, breathing in the pitch of the road, our sweat, our fear, our hope. The meteor struck the atmosphere above us, tearing a solid white rip across the mid-day
[ WP/MP ] Write a story reimagining a character from another piece of fiction as down-and-out/washed up/past their prime. He looked over the bar at her. She wasn't the best looking broad in the joint but hell he'd take it. He threw back another whiskey. The bad whiskey tasted
It's cute when your kid sends Santa a letter. It's surprising when Santa sends a letter back. It's worrying when the two become regular pen pals. And it's horrifying when you start reading the letters yourself... Dear Santa, Thanks for the BB gas gun. I did like you said and aimed for the birds. Love, Tim ***** Dear Tim, I'm so happy you're enjoying your new toy, and are putting it to good use. Remember, birds are all winged rats—even the colorful ones! We've had an increase in ninja sword requests this year, and I have one here with your name on it! If you thought the gun did wonders for our bird problem, wait till you see what this thing can do. Keep well, Santa ***** Dear Santa, Thanks for the cool sword, but mom says I'm not allowed to keep it anymore. She's making me go to some guy called therapist. He's okay, I guess, but his room smells like feet. This year, I was wondering if I could
"It's just the rain" The monsoon was bad. It was raining more than it should. I mean, everyday you end up drenched. Even though the bus stop is less than half a kilometer away. It's more like, the rain drops are attracted to you. I'm not sure this is rain. My clothes seem bleached. I hung them out to dry and now I feel if they stay out for a day or two they'll be perfect for wearing to an ancient Greece-themed party. Or they can be used when I don't want to fight. Also, I seem to be facing some issues. Each time it rains, my cold miraculously goes away. It comes back later, but it completely vanishes when it rains. And it sets my nose on fire. My skin is sensitive to rain, I believe. It kinda itches and only a shower seems to provide some relief. Especially when it rains. But these are events that took place 10 days back. I called up my girlfriend and told her this. "It's
[ CW ] Describe the room you're sitting in, maybe r/doodle will sketch it. This would be a test of how someone processes your words. 2 feet in front of me is a wall drab in color, effectively lifeless. To my left 1.5 feet away is another wall, it too has no personality. To my right 2.5 feet away is a third wall, this ones monotony is broken by a poster. Its colors seem to struggle with maintaining brightness as the life is sucked out of the them by the gray and grayblue surrounding it. Turning around, out the doorway is a hallway. Its an empty lifeless hallway. A first aid kit breaks the seemingly endless stream of ugly light brown. The light above me flickers. Others have moved their bulbs so the light does not turn on but shows no sign of tampering. My hope is lost, there is not even motivation to hide in the dark. My eyes dialate and move to the magical midground between looking forward and looking down as my mind kicks out of gear and thinks about.... not thinking. A passerby would not be able
And as the world burned, he began to laugh. The silhouette stood on the edge of a cliff. He overlooked a sprawling cityscape once known as Los Angeles. The smoke from the crater rose higher than the leftover ruins of the skyscrapers in the downtown district. It billowed black into the western sunset, and blotted out the stars forming in the eastern sky. The warnings had blared across the country only hours ago; the Russians, the Chinese, North Korea? No one knew who had launched the assault. The president of the United States did not hesitate starting a counter initiative. The scientists, diplomats, someone must have warned him; someone must have known the consequences, but it made no difference. Every nuclear equipped country retaliated against an unknown enemy. In those moments rockets were launched into the stratosphere in all directions only to rain down upon the earth ravaging it's surface. Atop his mountain, he let a small smile creep along his face. The burning city set
The human soul is a confirmed, measurable entity that enters everyone after birth. You have finally come to the realization that yours never showed up. It's on the news. On the radio. Everywhere. But I refuse to believe it. After all it has to be some spiritual bullshit. Right? I mean, I can not be the only guy in the world who is lacking a soul. An empty shell of a human being. A husk. A facade. A masquerade. So
An atheist and a Satanist meet at the gates of heaven. Saint Peter says there's only room for one of them. So that's how it is then? Only one of us? said the Atheist. Saint Peter cracked a smile that was neither good nor wicked and let silence speak for him. The Atheist quipped "Clearly I should be let in, the Satanist is the exact opposite of what you want in here." The Satanist glared at the Atheist, "At least I knew of Gods existence and feared it. Even I admire some of his work!". Saint Peter's smile widened slightly, then seeming to catch itself it shriveled back into a speaking shape. "He brings up a good point Atheist, you don't even believe in God." He flipped some parchments over on his giant podium as if to add a period on his sentence. The Atheist shrugged. "Fine, I believe now. I can change. I don't
You come up with an outlandish and false excuse as to why you are late, and your date is very suspicious. You are almost called out on your lie when a news story blows up and unintentionally confirms your story. "A meteorite? a stinking hunk of space rock? I'm supposed to believe that a meteorite crushed your car and not only that but your neighbors fought you for the rock and punched the taxi driver and that you ran the whole way here?" He asked me. "Yes" said I "I'm leaving." said he The whole restaurant had their eyes on us. The melodrama was palpable. I wiped the sweat from my eyes and rose with him. He turned dramatically and my eyes dropped. I only heard his footsteps and a muttering about respect. At the door Melvin collided with a man in a slouch cap and green trousers. "You" the man shouted across the room. "You owe me twenty four fifty" I guess the situation for taxis is bad enough where
The last words (prior to death) of the character are simply "Fuck it." The great yawning entrance to the maw of the mountain held breathless as the lone knight wandered beneath its shadow. A thick smoke billowed from the face of the mountain, extending a darkness across the land before it. The knight, pacing beneath the shroud, contemplated on how to handle his encounter. He was tasked with crusading against whatever heathen being lay beneath the mountain, charged with the crime of terrorizing nearby villages. The king of these lands spoke of the creature as if it were an army of heretics, invading the land to convert those that called it home and to gather riches. But the knight new better. It was no army, but it was rather a monstrous creature - a bastion of hate, evil, and contempt. The mountain itself seemed to breath with the smoke. Ashes occasionally billowed out
I feel like there is a lack of love on this subreddit. Write a Love Story! He stared in her eyes. He had never done anything quite like this before, nor did he think he could muster the courage to be in a situation such as this one. Her face glistened in the soft moonlight that pertruded from their hotel window. The breeze caressed her hair as she laid there waiting for him, longing for him. He saw in her what he never saw in his wife. Somewhere along the line his bride and he drifted apart, though they were never truly together. Their destiny together was a fabrication of nepotism and power. His parents found him a suitor and forced love into his world. For a long while he just accepted it. To him this was love, a fake charade orchestrated by puppet masters above his rank. Now he could see it though, what love truly was. He met this mistress while on a business conference in Boston. She was another associate working for some tech firm out west. They were paired together for a'team building' exercise which
You're from Earth? What's it like? "My name is General James Connor, and I am from Earth." I start my speech, taking into the microphone and facing the Titan colony. "I am grateful for your hospitality, we all are, us survivors. I only speak for the several dozen Earth-born that lived long enough to reach a shuttle. We arrived here only a week ago, we watched our world burn before us. Many of you are unhappy about our arrival, but it was the only way." "Most of you never saw Homeworld, but it was beautiful. It was burnt out, mostly ashes, yes, but it was home. Earth isn't like Titan, where everything is supplied, no." I shake my head, looking at the angry faces around me. "On Earth, you needed to work. You learnt courage, strength, dignity, pity and humiliation. Earth was everything and nothing. Growing up there, I fought for my food, waiting for the day I'd get to live on Titan. In the beginning, only
Kids grow up knowing the fact that their parents can read their minds for an hour a day. This ability stops when the kids turn 18. Somehow he always seemed to know when I was watching him. He would sit still, staring at me without blinking for what seemed like forever. Ever since he was young. His body would tense up as I tried to push through and see what he was thinking. It had been much easier when he was only a baby, and hadn't quite managed to control or even understand it yet. But as soon as he had been able to speak he had hidden himself away from me and shut down his brain every time I tried to reach inside. It was like he tightened his brain. Everybody else describes it like pushing their hands through a thick gas, almost like wind curling around them as they reach out. Maybe a little tingle here or there and they know exactly what their baby is thinking. But for me it was more like trying to drill a hole through concrete with your finger. His mind would contract and
"Do you still think about what you did?" The night was a cold one. Blackness swarmed beyond the windows. Frost caressing the glass flickered and shimmered in the firelight within the fireplace. Nothing other than dancing sparks and an antique lamp illuminated the sitting room. The hour was late and most were long asleep. Only two figures remained motionless, staring into the flames with identical, pale eyes. Erren and his family had decided to spend Christmas at his parents' house. His father, sister, niece, wife, and children slept soundly, but he was not given that option, for he knew something they did not. As he sat on the floor wrapped tightly in a soft blanket, his mind wandered to his wife's family. Nearly a year ago her mother had succumbed to cancer and her sister had overdosed. Distraught, her father had soon followed in their footsteps. Another figure sat on the couch behind him, still in her day clothes with a thousand yard stare. His mother, Scarlet, who had
While digging in your back yard, you make a discovery. A burst water main has me digging in the middle of the night. I just wanted to relax to the sounds of the night as I relieve myself but instead confront an unflushable toilet. I searched for the culprit and found a massive puddle in the back yard. I shut the water off and decided I was not going to go back to sleep at this point. Now I have to use a large bowl to sift through the muddy area that was my favorite grill spot because I don't own a shovel. After a few moments of retrospectively comedic struggle with modern plumbing, I uncover what seemed to be the problem. The problem was as I suspected, a cracked pipeline. The cause was less expected. Tree roots had basically strangled the pipe and caused fractures. That sounds normal, except there isn't a tree anywhere near my house. I even took a few minutes to scan the neighborhood for trees I might have simply ignored for whatever reason. No trees. What, then, would have such massive
After a long and exciting life, Mrs. Frizzle has died. Her long-ago students meet at her funeral - for the first time in a while - to reminisce about their experiences with her and how it's shaped them. The funeral ended many hours ago. The bar was closing in 2. Around a table, a group of old friends sat. Toast after toast had been echoing forth from it for hours now. The chatter seemed to have been endless since they all arrived. Then, a moment of silence. Soon broken. "So hands up if you fucked her?" said Arnold. All hands go up. "Missionary?" Most males remain. "Cowgirl?" Some of the girls join in. "Ate her cunt?" A few male hands, mostly female though. "Ate her ass?" Only Keesha and Carlos, they high-five. "Anal?" Again, almost all hands. "Got oral?" Everyone has their hand up. "Threesome with Susan and Jamal? Oh, guess only me then. Fucked in the bus?" Everyone. "Fucked on the bus?" Ditto. "Anyone get that sweet
Each person is born with the ability to consciously *snap* their mind as many times as wanted. Each snap unlocks a superpower with a mental illness in tow. The stronger the power, the more severe case of mental illness you get. Three years ago, something changed. Everyone already alive was the same, but from that day forwards, every new born child was different. I don't mean different as in they had an extra toe or four eyes. They looked the same, at least at first, but as time passed they started to change, and the world changed around them. When born, they would be normal, but quickly that would change. Things around them would spontaneously catch fire. People would turn to stone. Huge storms would rage overhead. Usually, these babies died within a few weeks, but for the ones who survived, and who could be approached, it did not get better. We were unable to conduct full tests, but we estimated their IQ to be no higher than 5 points. Two months ago, what we had all feared finally happened. Liverpool was destroyed in some sort of event
Someone you know feels alone and hopeless. Convince them that they are not. You are born alone. There is no one who is exactly like you. You live alone. There is no one that does exactly what you do. You die alone. There is no one with you in the moment when your life fades. But in this, you are not alone. We all share this inherent isolation. We all are born, live, and die alone. There is not one person who ever lived who did not experience this. We all share the empty world the same way, and we are all afraid of it. We cling to each other in the hopes we can find one like us, we strive to become the Idles we think we are like. We fight to defend even the ideas that tie us together. But it is alright. We have a redemption. We can love. And in that, we can choose what we live for. We can choose to live among like minded people, knowing that although we are all different, some
Countries and major cities have been locked down due to antibiotic resistance. Now every one is now forced to live their lives through VR At first it was an idyllic society, the laws of society were just as strictly followed as were the laws of physics. In retrospect it was the only way any of this could work, deep down we all knew this. Just as deep down we knew it was
As you gaze into the mirror, you see a different person staring back at you. Dirty, disheveled hair springs from my head. The eyes that stare back at me are vacant milky spheres with a dull glow that some might mistake for a twinkle. My nose is twisted, broken, with dried blood and beneath it a garish permanent grin makes me seem happy about my misfortune. The man staring back at me isn't who I am; I'm still the young man eager to discover my place in the world. In my mind, my brown hair is neatly parted and my eyes smile out at the world because they know a secret. They know how great of a guy I really am and how lucky the world is to have me. My nose is straight and my cheeks are clear, teenage acne spared me. My perfect teeth are as white as snow, soldiers lined up, ready to perform. The ghastly figure in the mirror parts his lips, revealing
The higher your adenine is the slower time seems to move for you. You decide to kill a man, as you do time stops. While time is stopped you hear a door open and a man says "congratulations". As the blood drips off you hands a blinding white light cloaks your vision for a second, when you open your eyes you are in a white void with only a single door in front of you. You think back to the man who's life you ended to get here, maybe a father, guilty only of startling you while you had a knife. You ended his life after he jumped you in an alleyway. The insurmountable guilt is suddenly pushed to the back of your mind once the door starts to move. The door creeps open and a man with a black coat walks through "Congrats," the man said as he slowly clapped his hands together, "You finally did it, I was waiting for you to push your limits" "What?" You reply "where am I?" "You're outside of space time" he
In the realm where souls reside before we're born, everything is pretty great. There's no poverty, no one wants for anything, everyone knows their role and purpose. It is, essentially, perfect. But that perfection is accomplished via draconian law: the only punishment is the "birth penalty" Everything was perfect, no one had problems, everyone knew their place. Anyone who sinned was sent to Earth, given the birth "penalty', and thus, utopia was established. For me, however, this was a dystopic society. No one strived for anything. People remained content with what they had. They settled for their roles, not trying to be the best anymore. Souls had given up all research, calling this the perfect society, the Stasis, heaven. It was hell. I was the only one born differently, with a thirst for perfection. I wanted to be the best, and so, the society sickened me. Unfortunately, I didn't sicken the society. My hardwork went unnoticed as I climbed up the ladder, people began telling me that I had finally found my role in life. I had power, I had wealth, I had perfection. But I wasn't satisfied. I realized
Everyone has been dreaming their entire lives. You awake to find every other person asleep. I jolt up. My eyes snap open. The morning light filters through cracks of my broken blinds. I feel stiff like I haven't moved a limb in years. Shuffling out of my sheets, I feel my dreams start slipping into the abyss. What was it? Something about school? I don't really care. The house seems awfully quiet, cold and hollow. I thought it was a school morning. Dad would be shuffling my younger siblings out of bed by now. It was already 7am. They're still asleep. Mum and Dad are back to back on their bed, dad hogging the doona. "Mum" I say somewhat forcefully. She's normally a very light sleeper, but she doesn't stir. Maybe she had too much to drink. I head for Sarah's room. Three year olds are never asleep. My footsteps make a strangely uncomfortable echoing sound as I move across the wooden floors. Sarah is cold out. But not dead. A loud'fuck the world' whooping noise cuts through the silence. I turn to the window
You have a time machine but there's a catch... We had planned to invent a time machine. A way to look at the past, to wonder at the Pyramids as they were being built, to see Elizabeth in her Court, to be there as Napolean was finally defeated at Waterloo - and, if we were being honest, to win a little bit of money on the horses. It didn't turn out that way. Unfortunately, there seemed to be some quite hard limits on how time travel worked. We don't pretend to understand the physics, but it works like this. 1. You can not travel into the future. 2. You can not travel more than sixty seconds into the past. 3. You can not travel within sixty seconds, in either direction, of another machine firing. 4. Your location is remains constant to your previous position. 5. Your velocity remains constant to your previous velcoity. We would never see the Pyramids in all their glory. We could never even be able to win a bet at the races. However, it turns out NASA was very interested in our little machine, due to that fourth little dot point. You see, the earth
You/He/She leave (s) home for work, and on the way notice (s) there are no birds to be seen or heard. Anywhere. “ Turn right ” the gps on my phone commanded me, and like its personal slave I complied. I slowed down as I drove past the park to take a moment to enjoy this first warm spring day. There were children everywhere, parents keeping enough distance to let them feel a little freedom, but staying close by enough to jump in if something were to go awry. That's when I noticed the man sitting on a bench near the pond. I had never seen a man look so depressed. I pulled into a parking spot and figured I would go see if I could cheer him up, I didn't have anything to do for a few hours anyway, and no one should be that sad on a day this beautiful. As I walk over I notice a few more things about the man, he was wearing an old golf cap, but I could see his wispy white hair sitting out
A person who doesn't have a name "I've been called many names, but hell, I don't know which one is really mine. I was born to inmate. She was doing life. I was told one of the male guards was my father, but that could have just been rumor. I grew up in a world of rumor and stories. Shit, I guess if you have to call me something, call me what they called me back when she was nursing me -- Prisoner Minus One. I could complain and whine about how I never had a childhood. I could tell you my hardluck story of how everything I learned I learned from my mother's fellow inmates. I can boost a car and make it disappear in a thousand untraceable pieces in under two hours. I can circumvent alarms and crack a Gibson with a dual dial combination in under half an hour. I know twenty different places I can hit you that will drop you dead on the floor. I'm not going to complain about my childhood or lack thereof. I don't have to. I got to play with other children with names. Charlie, Cedric, and Mara were good kids. They were
When you die, you don't go to the afterlife of you're religion, you go to the afterlife of the religion whose tenets you followed most closely, knowingly or not. The city hums with life. The people oozing by like a faceless blob. On good days I dive into the grime, and pull out society's cancerous refuse. Other days I acknowledge we've lost a member of blue. He crossed the line, and went dirty. There's no coming back once you're a crooked cop. .55. My birthday was only a few weeks away. Retirement teased me with daydreams of fishing out by my cabin, yet haunted me at the same time. As a child I was lucky to know my calling. As a man it defined me. My ex wives can attest to that. I was framed. I never stole the drugs from evidence. I never fed info to the local dealers. What I did do, was take my trusty glock -and two decades of tactical experience- and visited those that dared tarnish my good name. When I had taken out
You wake from a cryogenic sleep and find your ship has crash landed on an earthlike planet. Your crews cryogenic pods are empty. As I woke up, I could just make out that Ramirez's pod was empty. As I looked around, I saw that the others were empty as well. Strange, that
: Write a couple's "This is how we met," love story but in a genre that is not romance or comedy. That night I had dreams of super-heaven. Happy Monkeys climbing on shiny glitter rainbows was the image in my head. I smiled. Super heaven seemed like such a nice place. I tried to remember the rest of the dream, but it was already drifting off. I stood up and got ready for school. All I could think about was the bizarre church from yesterday. I Googled cults and realized this might classify. My parents seemed hypnotized, I realized after mulling about it all day. It explained why we were there for two hours and it felt like five minutes. I looked up hypnotism, It seemed possible. Impatiently I sat through my classes. After school, I rode my bike to the Church. I parked it in the bushes by the Johnson's house and snuck around back of the solid white building. No one saw
You jump. Your parachute doesn't open. "ARE YOU SURE THIS IS A GOOD IDEA HONEY?" I yelled to my new wife as I looked down towards the ground from the cockpit of our small airplane. Skydiving was not my idea of a honeymoon activity. "LOOK BABE, I'VE ALREADY GOT A PUSSY, I DO N'T NEED ANOTHER ONE," she said sweetly before nonchalantly stepping out of the airplane. Damnit. This was crazy. I didn't even like going on rollercoasters, this was completely nuts. But I couldn't not. I had to prove I was a man to my darling lover, especially considering that tonight was the night that she promised we would finally'do it'. I took a deep breath as I slowly stepped over to the edge for one final look before making the jump; at least that was the plan. I ended up tripping with my left foot over my other left food and fell somersaulting from the plane. "ARGHAGAHRAAAAAHAHRHAGHAGHARAAAAAAAAAAH!" I said calmly as I fell through the air whilst gravity relentlessly bullied me towards increased velocities. I
After dying, you wake up in the afterlife. The afterlife being millions of years in the future, when hyper-advanced technology capable of bringing back every dead person regardless of their body's physical state has been invented *Welcome back! We hope your arrival was not too bumpy. You may feel some discomfort waking up. Please notify the nearest medical staff if symptoms listed persist for more than two hours....* My body opened my eyes without my consent, with no authority except the laws of nature that forced me awake. Light was bleeding into my vision, clouding my judgement. I didn't ask to be born, I certainly didn't ask to go to heaven, I didn't want to see Jessica again! *All patients, the humanisers will commence in three.... two.... * A thin mist of a sour, sterile solution was felt briefly, forcing strength, feeling, tingles in my otherwise numbed extremeties. I tried to think about my surroundings, tried to focus as the blurry images of vague colorless blobs filled my vision. Numerous announcements were made, various sprays were applied to my body and
The Villain has accidentally drank a love potion that gave them a serious crush on the hero. Desperate to maintain their dignity, and knowing that the crush is fake, they do their best to hide it. This is much harder than they originally anticipated. "I see you have arrived, Desperado". Desperado stood in the distance, the wind curling his cape, hiding his grizzled face. He stood with poise. He stood with confidence. He stood with *big, bulging muscles-* Doctor Destructo shook his head. *Come on DD, get yourself together! * Desperado
Sailors have always been a superstitious bunch. In the long stretches of darkness and isolation between stars superstitions still run high. So let's hear a ghost story from deep space. "Are ya mad! You'll let the static in!" Captain Bridges slapped the radio switch into the'silent' position. "The static sir?" I tried my best to keep my composure but this was the first time the captain had actually spoken to me, and to meet him with a reprimand didn't seem like a good way to break the ice. "How long have you had your brain jellied?" "My brain.... jellied sir" "SPACE how long have you been off of a planet with real gravity ya green nitwit!" "This is my first mission sir" "Then let this be a lesson to ya. Don'tcha ever leave your radio runnin. Can't hear anything this far from a star system anyway. Anythin' that is, but the static." "Is there something wrong with the static sir?" "Nay there be nothin' wrong with it. They say that the static yer hearin is the remnants of the birth o tha whole universe. It reminds us that when
In magic, a sigil is a symbolic graphic representation of a wish, like a drawing. When destroyed properly, the wish comes true. Turns out, many masterpieces of art are actually sigils meant to trigger something as big as their artistic value. "So basically, like, all art is a wish, OK? And the better the art, the greatest the wish right? But you have to destroy every copy to make the wish come true. And like, you have the last copy of *Breaking Dawn* in the world, which is the greatest love story ever in the history of anything. So it has to be a great wish, right? Like world peace of something. So I want to destroy it so that the wish comes true. I know it's, like, a super sad loss for literature, but it's worth it and besides, I have the entire series memorized so I can just remember how hot Jacob is." The librarian goggled at the teenage girl in front of him, jerry can in one hand and tattered
Write an erotic story using the worst slang terms possible for each act/body part. I sat there, staring at it for what seemed like ages. A small dribble of drool oozing out of my mouth as my jaw hung loosely at its hinges, my mind unable to keep my muscles doing their job. His hardening meat stick was inches from my face, the light scent of a man filling my nostrils as my mind went blank. I NEEDED this humongous slab of cock meat! "Rebecca!" A voice said
You go back 2000 years with a pistol and one full clip. How do you take over the world? "DEATH!" The crowd's roars fill my ears. It might have been exhilarating if the stakes weren't so damn high. Even with my ace in the hole hidden on my person, the gladiator in the ring with me is terrifying. I'm not even supposed to be the real challenger for him. I'm just the one he warms up the crowd with. Nothing like a good bisecting to make the masses go wild. He turns to the crowd and raises his arms triumphantly before drawing his sword and charging straight at me. It takes one shot and he's on the ground bleeding just like the two lions that had been in the arena before us. I can hear the crowd gasp and some of them stand up from their seats, unsure of what to make of this new weapon. I fire two more shots into the crowd and, predictably, two patricians come tumbling off
A device has been invented that allows the user to gaze upon Heaven or Hell. Hell is terrifying, and those who see it often need counselling. But their terror pales compared to those who witness God's domain. As usual I am late for the meeting. It starts exactly at five, ironically in a room where all this began. It is in this exact spot they came for the prediction. That is all history now. When I opened the door, I saw a few chairs were vacant and they have already started the meeting. A new guy was sharing his experience. "Well I had this notion that it would be a scary place. But surprisngly it was not. It is all so..... common. But it is a type of common you hate. Like how long you have wait at a supermarket counter, how your TV is filled with shit you do not even want to know and so on. You think
Write about a person coping with the death of a friend. That Friday night, when Steven got home earlier from work, no one could notice one thing off about his behaviour. He twisted the key as he always did, one time to the left, and then two times to the right. He opened the door as he always did, just enough to get between it and the stand right next to the wall. He sat on the couch, staring blankly into the ceiling, thinking about his day, as he always did for fifteen minutes, no more, no less, before taking off his shoes and going into the kitchen to cook some dinner, as he always did. But by the end of his meal, it was clears Steven couldn't hold it in anymore. Urgently, he got up and into the bathroom, lunged towards the toilet, and vomited the stake he had just finished eating. Then out came breakfast. And then everything else, until his stomach was completely empty. By the end, Steven was sobbing inches away from the toilet porcelain, praying in his mind to anyone and no one, wishing for it to stop. Alas, nothing stopped. Not his vertigo,
SatChat: What is your favorite thing about WritingPrompts? /r/WritingPrompts has inspired me to take real steps into becoming a hobbyist writer. (no autocorrect not *snobbish writer*) Here I can put to paper/keyboard my thoughts, dreams, and ideas. Writing has always seemed like such a romantic idea; the ability to create whole people that live their lives for the sole purpose of inspiring others was truly magnificent in my young adolescent mind. It wasn't until I came here and was able to devote good time to writing in a place that fostered my love for storytelling that I was able to realize how much I enjoy it. My favorite thing here has actually been the chat room. Until recently I was like most here. I would browse and wait until the *perfect* prompt was posted and try and plaster something out real quick. I did not set an attainable goal I just kind of showed up every once in a while. Since I have begun frequenting the chat room I have discovered a group of dedicated and like-minded
Everyone except for your psychiatrist thinks you're crazy. You lie down to have another productive session with Doctor Marshmallow McSnugglesworth PsyD. "Doc, it's just, I don't know. Sometimes it feels like you're the only one that thinks I'm sane." Doctor Marshmallow McSnugglesworth peered at the hapless kid. He'd known him for as long as he could remember, and he wanted to help him. He really did. "Come now, James. There's nothing wrong with having a couple imaginary friends. I used to have them too, when I was a kid." James sighed, moving over uncomfortably on the psychiatrist's couch. "But McSnuggles, you never had a childhood. You can't even relate." The doctor's eyebrows raised. "What do you mean, James? I know I'm old, but I was a kid once." James rolled his eyes. "You're just my imaginary psychiatrist, remember? I called you Doctor Marshmallow McSnugglesworth. What kind of real person has a name like that?" The doctor smiled. ``'Marshmallow' was the first words I said, which is
A man is struggling to sleep due to laughter going on outside his house all night, every night. The problem? He lives alone on a small island. Laughing.... laughter.... laughs.... he hated it. It mocked him, giggles and whispers every night. At first, he had searched every inch of the property. In his house, under the porch, in the tall grass surrounding the gentle sloping beach, and he even shouted out to the dark waters. No response. He tried calling the police. Picking up the old landline phone, he expected the routine dial tone, ready to recieve numbers. Instead, those horrid giggles and laughs greeted his ears. Condenscending yet playful, they continued to rise in volume until the man slammed the phone down. He would
Most of the Milky Way galaxy is ruled by an interstellar empire, populated by hundreds of alien races. The species of the ruling monarch keeps changing; once they die, the emperor is reborn as a member of one of the many races. You're the first human-reincarnation of this ruler. The years before ascension are always my favorite, born with all the knowledge of my past incarnations there was really no need for me to "grow up" or be educated in the nuances of galactic rule, but long ago I decreed that each of my reincarnations must be allowed to grow to the age of majority before taking the throne. Death has not terrified me for many mellinia, each passing brings new possibilities, and a welcome break from my galactic responsibility for a few years. I do not know the mechanism by which my reincarnation is chosen, many theories abound, some species have been blessed a half dozen times, others never, and on a rare occasion I am reborn to a race yet to join my Empire, these I relish with great gusto, for it means they will play a pivotal role in the future of my Empire. Most are
It's been 300 years since Mars was colonized. Now, there is a revolution and the colonies are fighting for their independance. The first space battle in human history is about to begin. The Procession of Zurocorp soldiers eyed the crowd suspiciously. In theory they were all here to pay respects for the Governor-General of Mars, but the situation was far more complicated. The Old Governor-General had been far more pro Martian than his superiors had desired. But now that he was dead they would likely install a new, more conservative, leader who would keep the situation under control. Aries, Enjorlas where there to disagree. The Procession of Soldiers came to the spaceport where his coffin would be loaded onto a cruiser and taken back to earth. Eventually there was a crack of a laser, the officer at the head of the procession fell, and then all hell broke loose. All over the station mobs of Martians swarmed the men guarding and protecting it. It had been a well coordinated attack, and within minutes most of the
Write the letter that you always wanted to, but never did. Dear Mr. "I'm Too Good To Call Or Write My Fans", This'll be the last package I ever send your ass. Six months and still no word - I don't deserve it. I know you got my
The sound of sirens is heard as you watch an ambulance make it's way down your road. You look to see where it stops as you realise it finishes it's journey outside your door. A hooded figure in black makes his way to the door. You clutch at your chest as you feel your heart struggle... I opened the door, the orange bottle of medicine in my other hand. The paramedic had a black coat wrapped around him—understandable, as it was cold. Why he had stopped here, at my house, I had no idea. "What street is this?" he asked. "De Lancie," I replied. As I spoke I felt my heart flutter. "Where is 658 Loomis?" Loomis Street. Even for the offshoots in this backwater village, planted right in the middle of a forest, it was a pain to navigate—worse yet, they were going to Bill Hickerson's place, which was a real trick to find even if you knew where it was. I pointed. "Second left, where the shoes are hanging from the tree." I wasn't finished, but the paramedic had uttered a quick "Thanks" and jogged back to
Write a poem or story where the first and last words are both onomatopoeia. Fwoosh, and the lights fell out below me. Seatbacks in their upright positions, an honest mistake. Too much to
Starting line for your story: "He wasn't a cannibal. Not exactly..." He was not a cannibal, for he saw exactly what cannibals were every day. The dregs of society that he had trawled for his grand schemes delved into their grisly duties with reckless abandon, wandering through the towns of the lands to spirit children away. Most times he forbade them from feeding while at work, but when any of them disobeyed he gave free rein for the others to take them down instead. He tasted none of the flesh himself. That was so far beneath him, like chewing bread before the banquet. No, he could wait longer than any of the wendigoes he commanded. They had practically leapt at the chance to gain the powers of the gonefathers while staying sane, thinking they could fight off the hunger. How wrong they were, as half of the hundred discovered in the first week. All he had now were the ingredients waiting to be assembled into a succulent meal. Giving up now would be chewing the utensils instead of the dishes, taking the spice in exchange for the meat. It took foresight
Your powers only work in the rain. The day she left me, it had been raining. Big, fat, wet, droplets, just falling from the sky. It wasn't a poetic rain, no, not like the sky was crying. More like the sky had just finished a P90X workout and was pouring sweat. It was a disgusting sort of rain, and I hated it. I don't remember much of that day, just that it was raining, and that I hated my life, and that she was a terrible person and that I didn't love her that much anyways. Oh - and one more thing. That was the day I shot lasers from my eyes. Or at least, I thought I did. It wasn't a conscious decision, by any means. I'd just been walking around in my soggy boots, wishing for the rain to stop, wishing for an umbrella, wishing for dry socks, wishing she'd take me back. On the long walk back to
"You either die a villain, or you live long enough to see yourself become the hero." Moment of Clarity End of the line. I always knew it would happen. Eventually all the misdeeds catch up to you. The path I set out on was long and treacherous. I believed what I was doing was right, that what I was doing would make a difference. I was a fool. But now.... at the end.... I can finally make things right.... atone for my past. I know what I'm getting into. The odds are heavily stacked against me. I don't think I'll see tomorrow, but yet I will go forth and face my fate like a man. I hope that with my sacrifice I will have redeemed my soul. All the lives I took, all the people I hurt.... I'm sure I'm too far gone already. But right now, those people in the hospital are counting on me to buy them some time to evacuate. I will do my duty to the utmost of my abilities. They have a saying for this: "You either die a villain, or you live long enough to see
(WP) It's January 2015. You're a history teacher, making you fully versed in man's tendency to commit atrocious acts. You've lived your life mostly playing on the side and avoiding risks. When you die, you realize you're the first soul ever to land in hell. To Teach is to Redeem The last word the teacher heard was "Welcome home" and as her life drained she fell deep into shadow. Something terrible inhuman, wings fire shadow and pain was waiting for her. It bowed grovelling "Mistress honored guest." Than she saw him, Majestic though in ruin, beautiful like a torrid blood soaked dawn. His voice was melody "Welcome to Hell. "he said. She gasped. Around her was solitary splendor, an empty kingdom of atrocity, never used. Untouched. She spoke "I thought this place would be crowded." The Devil stepped forward "Before the redeemer came I had no dominion, after he came, he claimed my prizes. "he said ruefully "This solitude I suppose is my punishment. "Why I am here?" she asked. "I don't think I've sinned that much." Old Scratch asked "What is your sin?" She thought
Earth did get tidally locked with the Moon and it's only viewable from either North or South America. When Europeans first come to the new world they also tell tales of a new object in the sky. (x-post from /r/space) My God, we had been at sea for just a few weeks when it first appeared at the horizon. At first, we thought it had been an oddly shaped hill. That seemed to appease the men but over the days it grew and to me, as well as the men I suspect, the evidence was clear that it wasn't a hill,
It's your tenth birthday and you're finally old enough to get your first Pokémon. On your way to Professor Oak's lab, and owl flies by and drops a letter into your hands. It's from Hogwarts. You read the letter and realize you have a very difficult decision to make. As I made my way on foot across town to the Pokemon Professor's Lab to receive my very first Pokemon and begin my quest to conquer the Pokemon League, I was startled by the sound of flapping wings rapidly approaching. I spun around, looking for the source. Suddenly, I felt something lightly bump me on the head, and immediately saw what appeared to be a Noctowl flying away. But I had never seen a Noctowl like this before. It was smaller, fluffier, and as white as snow. A shiny, maybe? I never found out. Looking down at the ground, I saw what had hit me in the head. I yellowish-white envelope, sealed with red wax. I picked it up and flipped it over. "Red Potter" it said in spindly script.
A man is banished to the wilderness for 20 years. Write his diary entries for his first and last days of exile. I was born to fire. It flowed over my skin, danced upon my face, and stripped me of what little humanity I had left. Within the ruined cavity of my left eye I held the final images of my family as they were fed to the same fires I was pulled from. My death would not be so quick and so I was allowed to burn with them, but live. As soon as I was able to walk, I was ushered out into the wilderness. The final piece of society I was allowed to keep was in the ink buried in my chest that had once formed my son's hand print, now twisted with my burned skin into a misshapen claw. They promised twenty years, but swore under their breath that I wouldn't last the first month. I swore
Describe an object within five feet of you in as much detail as possible. A pair of simple black converse lie on the floor of the baby blue Honda fit my girlfriend is kind enough to let me drive. They are a far cry from the crisp kicks I'd received in the mail only a year ago. This has been a hard 12 months for them. The once crisp white inner lining has degraded into something a generous person might call "cream" or "off-white" to me they're just brown. The forces of time have transmuted the laces into a soft grey, like clouds in fall which promise a gentle patter of rain to listen to as you while away the hours. The rubber has had it particularly bad, time and constant use has worn down the bottom edges. Scuff marks cover the once pristine expanse. When they were new I'd taken, so much care to keep them scuff free I waited until the wedding to wear them. If I was going to a groomsman I need the shoes to
Short story that takes place in a single elevator ride. (This is all on phone so bear with me. Also inspired by a youtube clip called maybe) The elevator clicks open as I step inside, pressing the number 27 floor button. The doors shut, and the music inside plays a happy melody that simply bores me. It's almost eight in the morning and Im back again to another dreadful day of office work. I've been here for over six months now and while the pay is good, the work is god awful. The elevator stops and I'm brought back out of my thinking to the doors opening to the most stunning creature ive ever seen. She steps in and smiles, saying hello. Her voice chimes like an angel's harp. I say hello
In the future, technology exists to transfer one person's conciousness to another body, giving identity theft a whole new meaning. Write about the identity black market. The last thing I remember is walking home from work. What happened? Why is it so dark? I hear two people talking to each other about something. I cant understand everything due to their accents. I hear a door open very quickly, followed by footsteps, and then closed slowly. There is a person standing right in front of me now. But I cant see them. With a swift motion, he takes off a potato sack that was on my head. "What about this one? Will he work?" The man says. "He will do nicely" another says. And with that, they walk out of the room. I heard talk about money, but again they had very thick accents. When the first man came back in, he explained what was going on and how I was a part
"Yes, I'm an exorcist. Even demons and ghosts deserve redemption, a chance to move on and let go." Exorcism of Pilar Naala Transcript of events, 23/11/64 Damien: How long are you planning to do this? Baal: I.... I just can't help myself. I've told you before, sometimes I still have the cravings. Damien: What triggers you to do such things? Baal: When I'm alone. Listen, you told me not the summon the undead because they need to cross the light. Now that I'm alone with no company, what do you expect me to do for fun? Damien: Are you saying that it is all my fault now? Baal: Nooooooo. I mean, come on man. You always listen to me first before you spray me with those goddamn holy water. Just me let me enjoy
Describe the great hero of your story only through posthumous anecdotes of friends and family. *" I.... He, um. He came to our shop a few times. He was quiet, but really nice. "* *" I noticed him at the local cafe helping an old lady with her bags. "* *" He was a regular at my gym. Always re-racked his weights and gave newbies good advice when they asked. "* *" He helped me change a flat tyre once. I didn't know his name, but I saw his picture when they broadcast the news, and I knew it'd been him. He was a nice man, very kind. "* *" I have to admit that before the news story, I didn't know anything about him. But anyone who would sacrifice himself to save us all must be a good man. We all owe our survival to him. God bless Eliaz Ansari. "* *" Elias Ansari is the greatest and best mystery of our era.
Killing another human now allows you to exchange your remaining lifespan the victim's. Young people live in fear while the elderly plan their attacks. I was one badass motherfuckin man. I was in Korea and Nam, ain't nobody else gon na kill as many people without using a fire arm as me. I've killed fifty people without guns. Twenty without knives, axes, or things of that sort. And my life span is coming to an end. Recently some vans full of hippie scumbags started rolling through town. "Time to shine" I thought. The last person I killed was a quarantine guard in his late fifties, and I felt like living to fight some more, so I went to bed, woke up a early in the morning, and started lockin
Tell the story of Mitochondrial Eve, but give a sci-fi explanation for why only her descendants have survived. The sky above the port was the color of television, tuned to a dead channel. How little it resembles the drab, mottled grey of my world's sky. I shouldn't be surprised. So little of my world is unsullied by Man's hand. This natural, clear blue sky is so unfamiliar that it's become preternatural. Then again, that's the reason I'm here. The four species of Man, driven by inter-species conflict, are burning through the world's resources -- burning through the world itself -- far too quickly. I'm convinced that there is nothing in the modern age that can reverse the damage. Another ice age is inevitable. No human on Earth can save us. Our whole Genus faces doom. We need a human that is no longer on Earth. Someone who isn't part of our modern age. Where better to look than a hundred thousand years ago? There is a species that didn't make it to the modern age. Some eighty
You are a malicious imaginary friend, your host is 19. You feed off of her when she has fun with you. She thinks she's too old for you, all her friends and family say so, change her mind before you fade forever. It was the 11th of Februry, the day before Alana's 19th. I was hanging upside down in her cupboard when I was woken by a scuffle and a bang and a cry of pain. It was surely still the step dad railing on mother and child, making her miserable. There was no way to keep her happy and content in this environment, and that meant death for me. The door slammed as Alana, in tears slumped on her bed. I filtrated under the door and regained full form. "Alana, don't cry. You need to live and breathe with the world. Come on let's play Psycho Killer." "Shut up Henry you're not real!" she screamed through her pillow. "I'm real in your mind and that's all that matters. Come on let's play!" I started bouncing imperceptibly up and down on her bed. "I don't feel like playing, go back
You are a third party spy who has infiltrated both armies in a battle/war. On the same night, both leaders tell you the same exact plan, and yes, they are telling the truth. "We've put forth a valiant effort so far. Many men have died for this cause. But..." I watched him bow his head, sighing. "I just can't see
A priest, a rabbi, and a minister walk into a bar. But this is no joke, this is a tragedy. The Lenox brothers ran a smooth operation that got a lot of buzz in the 70's, and rightfully so. There was lots of cocaine, there was lots of money, and lastly -- and perhaps most importantly -- lots and lots of beautiful women running around begging for a spanking. This was the real deal. This was the paradise at the end of the rainbow. This was the payout. The building somehow stood straight for what way too long. Mike ran a cannoli joint out front, and kept everything clean. He was serving the best damn cannolis this part of town -- any part of town for that matter. Cheryl, his beautiful and wonderfully well-liked wife, and himself, a sort of myth come true of the crack pot making it big, ran the cleanest business there was. And it paid, big. Out of the back, we ran with the normal three. Racketeering, drug smuggling, and subjecting those around
Flowers grew where she walked, only to be burned away in the footsteps of him who followed. She was beauty incarnate. For me, at least, with her hair flowing, with hordes of children playing around her, with her clothes flowing in the wind. I watched her grow, turn into this woman, walk in front of me with pride. And I wished in that pride there was still the spark of love. Wherever her foot stepped, blades of grass sprung, flower bloomed in her stroll. Every tree that she touched offered apples in exchange. Every bird learnt to fly from her hands, and every birth had her as a midwife. Every artist had her as a muse, every religion had her as a loving deity. And there was a time she loved me back. Times she tried to reach her hand to me, times she sent me gifts of fruits, before sending birds with messages towards me. But I was cursed from birth. Every one of her touches left her with scars at the tips of her fingers. Every fruit I touched, I could only feel how
You are driving down the road when you see a Woman in White ghost hitchhiking. And even though you know she is a ghost, you pick her up anyway... Ted shook his head and took both fingers out of his ears as the Ghostly pale woman, in her gray, somewhat luminous wedding dress stopped screaching. The voices of thousand tortured souls fading off into the night air. Ted shook his head, his right eyebrow raised. "Sooo.... Are you just going to wale at me in horrible fashion all night or are you going to get in?" The Ghostly figure twitched her head in a sickly but puzzled manner. She lookef around as if confused. Ted patteted the empty passenger side seat in impatience. "Well? Geeet iiiiiiinnnn. Jeez, it's cold outside... Not that you would notice, am I right? HA! "Uh, ok" she said floating into the seat, her voice still soundingwith the ring of thousand other voices. "Ugh. Could you not do that echo-y Evil Dead voice thing... It's giving me headache. No offense. " "I'm sorry" her voice snapped to one pleasant tone. "So, let me guess? You're the bride-to-be of
You are eating at a fancy restaurant when you suddenly begin to rise into the air. Now, you're floating and have no idea how to control this. The fans are stronger when you're drifting three inches from the ceiling. I know certainly that I've vaporized somehow. Though I do not remember being more concrete than here, in this awareness The air sifts through me. I am giddy, but not sure why. I am less weighty than a pristine sheet of tissue paper, but not sure how I know this. There are people below me. People. What a concept when I am so light. I can not hear, but am certain that there is a three inch chunk of fine Kobe beef punched in the back of that woman's throat. She can not make noises but there is a man maybe pressing into her soft stomach and calling She is wearing something in pastel. There are varying bruises on her arms, small round splotches like blue candy. He is calling her, worrying I am halfway in the woodworked ceiling. I
- Tell a story through a phone conversation twice: the first time, the reader can only hear one side of the conversation, and the second time, the reader can hear both sides. "I'm coming, Amora stay calm, I'm on my way." "Don't say that, the baby is going to be fine. I'm only five minuets away at the store. Amora, just stay there, I'll take you to the hospital. Everything is going to be fine." "W.... I.... No. It's going to be okay, it has to be okay! Just lay down and wait for me? Try not to think about it. Just don't do anything else till I get there." "It's going to be okay..." "God.... I hope I'm not too late." . . . . . . . . . "I.... I told you not to leave me. John the baby.... I.... She wouldn't stop crying. I told you not to leave me." "I'm coming, Amora stay calm, I'm on my way." "I know I killed her. I didn't mean to. I just she's so small, and she wouldn't stop crying." "Don't
A hole in time and space opens up, and you see your younger self looking back at you. You have exactly one minute to tell young-you whatever you can before the hole closes. Bonus points if you only give yourself one minute to type the response. Did that really happen? I knew it was coming, I was prepared for years, yet I still was panicking and stumbled over my words. That portal started closing immediately after it opened. Stocks, disasters and preventable wars. I had managed to fit that part of the message into a careful selection of words and ideas. I had unlimited power in my hands. I had a good 30 seconds left to fill it with any number of selfish and personal things I could have changed. My personal obligation to the world was done. About Vicky, how she tore our heart out. About Carlos, that backstabber. That summer with the red bike. I still have the scar. And yet, I stood there and said nothing. I thought I could change it. But I froze. At least, that's what I remember. That older me standing there.
[ CW ] Either begin or end your story with "In my pocket, there was a toothbrush and a human eyeball." I don't own much. In my pocket, there's a toothbrush. I sleep on the streets, in the woods, in dumpsters, maybe in a homeless shelter if a bed's open. I eat what I find. I got jumped a few hours ago. In the park after hours, just looking for a place to sleep. These kids busted my front teeth with a rock & I was down for the count. That didn't keep them from beating me further into the dirt. I could feel their hands going through my pockets & my jackets, one by one as they unzipped them. They laughed. They got mostly everything. My old torn up wallet with $ 12.37 & a nearly destroyed picture of my ex-wife & daughter, Joan & Missy. My pocket knife. My dogtags from the 1st Iraq war. A little bit of dope. A little bit of weed. But they left me
You're a history major. Your final exam is to travel back in time and successfully pass as a normal, everyday citizen. It's not going well. EXT. VILLAGE - NIGHT 1692 Sparks float idly against the black sky. Below, villagers have gathered around a pile of wood, stoking it from the bottom. They shout and chant and cheer. TIMMY, in the same colonial wear as the villagers, is tied to a post at the top, tears trickling, watching helplessly as the flames ride higher and higher toward him. POV The hellish orange, licking, lapping, then finally engulfing - BLACK INT. CLASSROOM - DAY The class, and the teacher, MRS. JORGANSEN watch as Timmy materializes on a matted metallic pedestal, the front and sides of which are blinking with lights. Next to him is a roll-out CRT television set, displaying the village folk still angrily stoking a now Timmy-less pile of burning wood. Timmy stands up and wipes away some tears, he still wears the colonial outfit. His pants are singed at the ankles. TIMMY And that -
You've been drifting at sea for 20 days, and you're beginning to wonder if leaving the island was such a great idea. Water. There was a lot of fucking water. My thirst would have settled for less. The raft wasn't steady. It had a habit of rocking back and forth, up and down, making my insides feel on the verge of joining the world- I was seasick. I had forgotten that I get seasick. I'm seasick and sick of the sea. The raft, right. It wasn't steady, so if I moved on it wrong, I fell off. My clothes were dried and salty. I was still and sunburnt. It wasn't a good combination. "Oh, I took a year of shop, I can manage this!" Please. There wasn't any need for a crooked shelf on the S.S. Hindsight. Maybe, maybe- very just maybe, it could have been used for shade. I needed some shade. I was baked. My phone still wasn't working. The plastic bag had been a good idea. Picking AT & T, less so. My battery was nearly dead, and I still didn't have a signal out
The internet is accessible only to the "enlightened ones". You, a "casual", have gained access to the internet. There had always been the naysayers. They were usually older and had learned to live without. Then there were the depreciators. The ones who had tried it before it was made exclusive but still never got the draw of it. I was born to a naysayer mother and a depreciator father. Neither sides of my family ever spoke of the "glory days" when it was readily available. It was never on their radar. Surprisingly enough, even though computers were rendered basically useless without it, my family still had one. To do what on, we never knew. Nobody taught us. Nobody needed a computer. But I taught myself. I was always obsessed with computers. Maybe I was autistic.... Maybe I was just strange. I started playing solitaire. My, what a delightful game! I could play it for hours! I then found minesweeper. It was not as enjoyable as solitaire, but I still found how to correctly strategize in the game. The games proved to be fun, but I knew there was something more.
Rewrite a known story so the hero is the villain or vice versa I only did it because I loved her. I told my lies with a sweet, honeyed tongue. She was young. Innocent. Naive. Trusting. When I knew her before, she was cold, distant, angry beyond measure. Can't you see? I had no choice! It was for love! We ran together for what felt like an eternity. It was just the two of us, alone at last, young and in love. Whenever I would look at her, she would look back at me and I would see a spark in her eyes. I broke down the last of her barriers and we shared a night I will always remember. I did it for love. There was danger, yes, and pain. There was anguish and blood and fire. I kept her safe through it all, and every time she would look at me I felt another guilty stab through the heart. She didn't deserve this. I shouldn't have done this. If I had never chosen to get involved, she would never be in danger. I stayed
You are a compulsive liar. Convince me you are not. Did I ever tell you about the time we was pinned down by snipers Fallujah and I saved.... What? Ha! Jeremy's talking shit behind my back now? Heh, I love the fellow, but that man is so yellow ya could dye curry with him. Sayin' I was holed up safe back at base, fakin' a flu—poor bastard is talking out his ass. You know where he was during the thick of it? Not in the city, not at camp; no, he were still medevaced out from blowin' himself up with his own jammed gun! Naw, naw, I'm not accusing him of anything, that equipment failure shit happens. S'just that there be barrels full of boys too cowardly to earn a medal and still'd like to come back with a shiny heart to call their own. Jeremy ain't that low. Well, I'm givin' him the benefit of me doubts anyways. But God damn, he's sure
There are 6 people on an elevator. It suddenly shuts down and a voice from the speaker said: The elevator will only function if there is only one left alive. "Son-of-a-bitch!" I finally get a job interview with the best law firm in town and what happens? I rip my pants on the way out the door and have to put on a new suit. Had to get an Uber because my car wouldn't start. Somehow, I manage to barely make it to the office complex on time and the elevator stops working with me stuck inside. I glance
All my life I had been fascinated with the memories I can recall that weren't my own. "Though I know it's not truly me, it feels like I am looking in a mirror. I look at him unblinking and my reflection looks right back. He is clearly vexed with his furrowed brow. He sits down in an uncomfortable-looking plastic armchair in the corner of the room. The muffled sound of a television bleeds into the room. My roommate pays it no mind. In fact, he doesn't seem to be mindful of anything when I look at him. Just lost in thought, arms akimbo and legs crossed in that stupid armchair. He is dressed comfortably; a grey sweatshirt tops a faded pair of blue jeans. A clock is ticking in the room, keeping asynchronous rhythm with the television. I am about to get up when the man jumps up and walks over to me. Brow furrowed, he seems like he is about to box my ears. Instead my view lurches backward as he pulls something out from behind
Make a short, bad fanfiction. The next commenter will try to point out its faults. Thomas Wayne looked at the newspaper and circled the black & white picture of Batman jumping off the Golden Gate bridge in pursuit of some criminal. This arthritis made moving his felt tipped pen slow going, but scrapbooking was all he had left to do these days. "Hey Martha!" he called to the other room, "Bruce is in the paper again!". At that moment the glass patio door shattered and he heard his wife scream. Thomas dropped his pen and grabbed his smartphone, *theyre here*. The SWAT team started yelling, "WHERE IS HE? HANDS UP!" Thomas Wayne put the phone down and interlaced his fingers behind his head, this took a great deal of effort. Just as the door to the kitchen burst open tires squealed outside. The SWAT team members circled Thomas and started zip-tieing his hands together in front of him. "Just tell us where he is." "You boys want some coffee? If you untie my wife I'm sure she'd be
[ CC ] [ PI ] C764 ~ would really appreciate some crit for this piece. I find it a bit difficult to envision the setting. I know it's complicated, but my brain just isn't putting together a good image of what it looks like. It seems like, later in the story, you're describing structures, which doesn't jibe with the concept of cages in my mind. Also, where did the building materials come from? I'm also a bit spotty on the concept of
You die in a car crash. You wake up in limbo where you must impress Satan AND God with a talent/skilll to get a second chance at life. Limbo. Shit. It's like standing in a lineup at Starbucks that never seems to be moving forward. I look up, God seems resigned, almost disappointed that anyone lands here. Satan has his perpetual sneer, I feel like all those Reconnaissance artists must have met him personally. probably had something to do with the women they consorted with, the lucky bastards. Limbo. How the hell do I get out of here, and what's the likely outcome. I counted off my achievements and my disgraces in my head, neither list was likely to impress either of my eternal judges. Well, fuck it. There no case to be made here, so I might as well think
The world as we know it is a case study, and the panel of scientists in charge are debating wether or not to end it. "You're proposing we end it?" "Let's face it. They've over-run the planet. It's just not self-sustaining anymore." "They're so majestic, though..." "Doctor, it seems to me that you've become somewhat.... *attached*" "Maybe. We've been watching a long time after all." "We took an oath to remain objective. That's how science works. " "Yes, but wiping out whole species..." "They've done that several times all on their own. We would just be taking the decision out of their hands." "Don't sugarcoat it. That's genocide and you know that as well as me." "It's our right. We *made* them." "Still..." Silence. Then.... "We ought to step back. This obviously isn't working." "Just let someone else handle it?" "Precisely." "Have they decided what to run next then?" "Since Project D is quite clearly a failure, they decided to go with something a bit more economical: Project H." "Those things will never survive. Who's running it?" "New guy. Can't remember his name. Yawley? Yellwen?" "Never heard of him." "It's on
The enragement ring. In this world, there is a custom where you must propose to your arch nemesis to hate each other forever. If you had ever met Phil, you would know from the moment that his blubbering lips opened and his putrid breath wafted in the vicinity of your nose as the squealing pitch of his voice grated on your last nerve that he was born to be despised and loathed the world over. Hence, it was not a surprise that he was a popular choice for many when it came to choosing their nemesis. For me, it could only be him. He was all my pet peeves rolled into one greasy vile package. He was the nails on my chalkboard and
Create a story with a Key, Castle, Moon, and Flashlight. The Lantern My mother told me, on her deathbed, why she built it. It was a simple device, somewhere between a flashlight and a lantern. With her dying breath she told me to keep it lit at night. I didn't fully understand but respected her wishes. I hung it from our porch and watched over the glow. I grew restless and journeyed to the farthest corners of space, not knowing what deep darkness held, but forever intrigued. I brought the lantern to light my way. At last, resolved to return home, I came upon a magnificient castle. Wall after wall of icy rock and gravity belied my entrance, until at last I came upon the entrance. I held up the lantern and the archway before me opened to a crypt. The door, a writhing patchwork of starlight, pushed open easily. I descended. I gazed at the boxes strewn around. Each one had held room for dozens of planets, but they were empty, robbed, pryed open by something ancient and sour. Dejected, I spied carvings on the floor and set the lantern down for a closer
You are the leader of an Alien species about to make first contact with humans, with the offer to mentor us past this stage of our civilisation. What would be your first contact speech to Humanity? The first draft was a beautiful, flowering document that was more or less the same format as every other first contact speech prepared by his kind – praising the intelligence, the creativity of this sentient species, and offering to usher them into the galactic community to enter a new golden age of prosperity..... that was before the Xenologists briefed him. Commander burned it. Where they intelligent? Yes, frighteningly so. Creative? Most definitely, but in the most sick and twisted of ways. Prolific too, there were 10 billion of them. Not
Imagine reddit existed in 1939. Write what the comment sections would be like when Britain and France declare war on Germany. [ - ] PM_ME_YOUR_ANKLES (4 Points) 9/3/39 9:38:01 AM Germany is taken off way more than they can chew. I mean they're a shit-tier second rate power that can't even get their own economy straight. Even Poland could kick their ass in a war. [ - ] SIEGHEIL (2 Points) 9/3/39 9:40:46 Lol the German panzer far outclasses your shit Frenchie and British tanks, you juden fag. [ - ] PM_ME_YOUR_ANKLES (0 Points) 9/3/39 9:45:12 Ha ha, and who won the first world war? We kicked your ass so hard that you still owe us a bunch of loan payments, you fucking kraut. [ - ] SIEGHEIL (-1 Points) 9/3/39 10:34:55 Go away you tea-guzzling fucking juden. We lost because
You pray to God, wishing that you will get a boyfriend/girlfriend before you die. He gives you immortality. O Lord in Heaven, I pray to thee, Do not let me die alone. I want to feel a woman's touch, To be loved down to the bone. Please, Lord, help me so, Before my heart is overgrown, With weeds and moss left untrimmed, Boiled over with love unbrimmed. "I will grant thy wish," said the Lord, Smiling ear to ear. Just look to the sky with open arms, and salvation you will hear. I did as such, tears streaming down, Devoid of spite and fear. I felt God's love wash over me, And smiled thinking of what could be. So I waited; I did not pursue, Knowing God yet had a plan. I waited a year, two, then ten, And still remained but one man. My skin stayed smooth, soft like silk, I felt not the millennia's span. My loved ones died, yet I remained, Forced to endure a life still pained. "Why, Lord?" I cried out to the skies, "Am I one which you so despise?
"You had ONE job!" both Satan and God scream at you. "It wasn't that bad." I say in defense. The two look down at me, a dangerous light in both of their eyes. In Satan that was normal but in God.... "Look, the job was harder than you guys thought. I mean-" "No, it was very easy actually. So easy many men before you resisted the urge." God boomed. "I've got to side with gramps here." Satan said," I've got guys getting their innards eaten out who could have gone about this better." "It was just there," I retorted," I kind of had my back against the wall. It was the best option, the only option. They were going to use theirs anyways." God put his face in his hands then looked back at me. Somehow his ageless eyes were aged. "Fifteen men listened to me and didn't press the button. Fifteen! Let me remind you that even during the height of
Write a dystopia that turns into a utopia. I was in a gaming store on the day the world as we knew it ended in June of 2009. It started with a storm and though it seemed as if it would be a normal summer storm, somewhere inside we knew it wouldn't be. As we stood in the parking lot of the shopping center we watched the dark clouds roll in, faster, and stronger than ever before. If a storm ever had the ability to hate, it was this one, and we could feel it. First came the rain and the thunder, a 100 year storm they called it. It was massive and lasted for days. After the storm the darkness remained, there was no sun, no stars, and no moon. This lasted many years and much of society crumbled. As there was little to no power, many governments lost control all together as they had no way to communicate or keep tabs over large masses. Some societies came up with their own
[ TT ] Trials are still conducted by a "jury of peers", but punishment is now meted out "eye for an eye". "You need to vote." The lady with the red necklace looked at him. They all did. "It's the way this works." He tried to look her in the eyes, he really did. "I'm sorry." The soft-spoken man smiled at him. "That's alright, take your time." "No, I'm sorry." He stood up and walked to the window. He pressed his head against the glass, letting the cool glass calm his head. "I can't do this." There was a groan from the table. "Oh come on!" The blue hair woman sighed loudly. "We've all voted. We're all in agreement." She stared at him. "It's up to you." "That's the problem." He couldn't see them, but he could hear the murmuring. "It's all up to me. I will sentence this.... This man will be..." He tailed off. "It's beyond a shadow of a doubt." The man
You tried to warn them. You knew it would be the end of civilization, but the damn fools would not listen. You are the 5th dentist who did not recommend Crest. The Omega sees everything. Inside the Cremulon 10 different physio-chemists observe the specimens under the glass. Chemicals are added to the cylindrical diffuser. The atomic chambers are charged with a billion volts of Neptune's liquid energy. The substance is ready. The creatures bow their heads covering their crimson eyes. The Dark physio-chemists agree. Below the cosmic base a million mindless, tortured Neptunians bawl and scream as the heat from the Alpha machines shoot across their bodies. A thousand diamond enforced industrial-grade blockheads refine the coal-like substance into something sparkly -- - and white. The naked bodies of a million Neptunians squirm against the raging engine. This is hell. The substance is packaged in large spherical containers by the sentient androids of the Omega Mind and delivered by light years to Hyperion space, in the
You are watching TV when your show is abruptly interrupted by the President of the United States announcing to the world that the existence of God has been confirmed by NASA and a team of the most brilliant scientists from around the globe. *Breaking news, we at Channel 9.2 News are streaming live at the location believed to hold the very corpse of God himself. * *It's true Tom, without a doubt the very skeleton before us is indeed that of our supreme creator. Of course this may be baffling to some, so I have Natasha Trotsky, paleontologist and founder of God, here to explain the details. * "Well it all started with us searching for pre-Cambrian fossils when we came across an unusual structure below. At first we assumed it to be a volcanic formation, then some sort of meteorite, but after sever examination and
the monster in the closet finally lures the child into the darkness, only to realize something is very very wrong Jenny tapped on the closet door of her new room. "Come out, come out, Mr. Monster! I know you're in there!" she sang, tilting her head cutely to the side. "You're not *my* Mr. Monster, but we can still be friends!" The closet was silent. After waiting for a few more minutes, Jenny walked to her bed. Quickly, she curled next to the tattered remains of her bunny and fell asleep, unbothered by the creature's lack of response. Her Mr. Monster had taught her many things. Patience was one of them. ******* The next night, Jenny sat with her back pressed against the closet door. "Do you have claws? My Mr. Monster had claws. He used his claws to gouge eyeballs out." Jenny narrowed her eyes when she heard the faintest of noises from the closet. Immediatly, she giggled. "Mr. Monster was always telling me creepy stuff like that!
[ wp ] Alien creature is trying to have sex with you but its biology is so bizzare you don't even realize. **As the chancellor of the Galactic Federation, I welcome you, the one called Charles O'Malley, Ambassador of Earth, to our Grand Council. ** The room applauded, and Charlie beamed, rising to his feet. Immediately, the delegates slid out of their chairs.... Which were bolted sideways onto the wall. Interesting.... And then began to line up in order to greet the delegate. The first delegate, a purple-skinned Grxxlib with at least a dozen tentacles, came to a halt. "I am Nxx! p of the Grxxlib. Jibbensplack," it added, curling its tentacles into a knot and taking a bow. "Jibben.... splack?" Charlie responded, taking a bow in turn. Nxx! p deposited ceremonial phlegm on his shoes before continuing on its merry way. "I, uh.... Thanks," he managed to say just as the next delegate arrived. This one, a two-foot, green-furred generalissimo, clacked its boots at attention. "We are the Honorable General of the Skies, Land and Super Sea Gribblechit XLVI," it declared proudly, before
A form of entertainment has been developed where people are brought to the brink of death and then teleported to medics who normally revive them. The longer you wait, the more money you earn. You have just lost everything and with no other choice you enter the games. I had a ground-level view of the stadium behind iron bars as I waited. That was nice; tickets like these would have costed a year's salary for the well-off. The contestant before me finally tapped his thigh twice with his twitching hand. The floodlights went green, and with a roar of the announcer he dropped through the great trapdoor to the team of medics waiting below. Then the massive video display blinked, flashing up my name - *Mouse Dixon* - and my heart rate - *175.... 180.... 185*. Amusement rippled around the stands. It's okay. Pain is just pain, and contrary to popular belief, not that many players die. The other side of the board was my concern: * $ 100.... $ 200*. I would just keep my eyes on that as it bobbed and bounced upward. No less than 1.5 million dollars
Dscribe depression in a contextless monologue. I am tired. Everyday. Days escape me, seconds hold onto my hands as I ball them into fists to get through to the next one. And the next one. And the next. I'm not here anymore, you know? I haven't been for a while. My away message has been updated. You've tried to reach me in my current state, but I am very tired. If you are calling unknown, then I was too afraid. Please leave your message after the tone and I will try to come back to you in a timely fashion. I will try my best. My apologies in advance. Beep. Shut it down. Why are there always so many thoughts; shut it down. I am tired and my head is so full that the words spill from my ears down my shoulders until they pool around my feet and I can't move. I can't move because I'm so tired, you know? I want to hide in between
The universe conspires to make you late for work everyday. Your boss gives you one last chance. This time you're ready... As I dashed out the door, the postman spotted me and made a beeline for me with a rather large package for my neighbour that needed signing, and normally I would have wasted time happily accomodating the package, but not today - no. With one look at me, he backed away, got in his truck and hurriedly drove on. I waited in the queue for the bus behind an old man who always took his time counting the pennies for the driver. This time I cleared my throat, and when he saw me - he quickly got out of the queue, easily saving everyone five minutes. The bus journey itself was very quick and quiet. The driver himself nervously asked me where it was I wanted to go, and I simply gave him the address of my office. It wasn't even on the bus route, but he obliged. I thanked him and got off outside the gates, where
You are an elite pickpocket. Describe your lifestyle. Every morning is the same. I get up promptly, at 6:15am. It's a short trip from my bed to the bathroom; my condominium is plush, but not particularly large. I'm only here for several months of the year, anyways. My work is rewarding, though not particularly hard. At this point in my career, my associates do most of the work.... though the spoils remain largely mine. After the shower, a small breakfast -- always the same -- of egg whites and wheat toast. I need to be light on my feet, and I can't afford to look out of shape.... image is everything in my line of work. I'm a pickpocket, of sorts. My life is funded by others, usually with very little awareness. I lead a luxurious lifestyle, dining at the finest restaurants, free rides on private jets from.... supporters. The occasional blowjob from an ambitious young associate. I wear the same basic outfit each day. Dark grey, but not quite charcoal. White shirt. A tie that says, "I matter." I comb my hair, perfectly greying, in a slick part.
I don't need flesh to be human. I loved the way he held me. His brown eyes were gentle, his hands careful. He would slide them down my length and I would shiver, aching to move. I did not have to, though. He washed the grime of the past from me, held me close, and asked for no more. So I loved him, in my silence. I loved, too, the way he needed me. When his hands were not gentle, but instead seized me, yanked me close. His fingers shook -- I could feel his heartbeat hit like a hammer -- but when I settled into place, so did he. He called life into me, a spark that exploded into motion, that spiraled me into the world. *Alive. * It was not only motion that made me live; any machine can move. When he lifted me, he put in me not only metal, but humanity. His touch sent a spark that struck again and again. With it, the fierceness
You are being pulled over by the police. You realize in this moment you are about to become a wanted criminal, because your job only gives you a half hour for lunch. "Shit shit shot. I'm running late, fucking Panda Express lunch hour bullshit!" I've had 2 strikes already for being late for lunch, but Panda Express never had a lunch hour rush! What the hell! WHOOP WHOOP You would think being an accountant would be a boring job, but this is the most nervous I've been in years, my anger is starting to boil out. Why the fuck did I become an accountant? It's just stress and more stress, especially with this goddamn cop pulling me over ON MY LAST STRIKE! I'm no normal accountant either, got sucked into the Russian mob as their accountant due to a deal my previous employer made. If I'm late one more time they'll think I'm dealing with cops and kill me. I'm sweating nervously, this cop seems oka- wait is that a Fucking K-Nine unit? Oh fuck, oh no no no! I've got my stress "relievers" all throughout this car. The cop is coming with the dog, he's going apeshit back there,
Write the letter that you always wanted to, but never did. Dear Sister, Our last conversation left a lot of thing unsaid. I see your points: me not reaching out to you, checking to see how you are. You call me and others selfish because, in your mind, the conversation never turns to you or what's happening in your world. The truth is, it's hard for me to relate to you now. I used to see you as strong, that you could overcome anything. Now all I see is you being conquered by the eating disorder. You say you are lonely, and I know that the disease makes you this way. You've called our parents narcissists, not wanting to have anything do to with them (especially since you don't want them to know about your disease) and yet have no problem asking for handouts when you've needed money (which they've gladly done). You can't accept gifts from then denounce the same people who have helped you. I hate that you've missed family events, putting money ahead of it but preach
You live in a world where every person receives a superpower on their 18th birthday. You eagerly count down the seconds then shriek in horror as you are given a power no one would ever want to be stuck with. Barry was nervous. Tonight he'd go to bed a 17 year old and wake up an 18 year old with his power. What category would he get? There's the three categories: Body, Mind, and Mobility. Body can be anything from strength, to scales. Mind could be super intelligence, to knowledge of a specific category. Mobility could be flight, to the ability to vibrate. There's no telling what I'll get from my parents. They're one of the few times a major fell in love with a minor power. My father has the ability to fill any container or vessel with the non-alcoholic beverage of his choice. My mother has super intelligence, and never forgets anything. Anything. I felt my eyes getting heavy and the world going dark. I dreamed of all the things I could do, all the people I
Black Widow, on a whim starts dating Greg, quirky and funny, but mostly average worker for SHIELD. He is not a genius, he is not a covert agent, he isn't particularly important. They seem happy together. The rest of the avengers are dealing with inferiority complex now... "I just don't get it," Tony drunkenly slurred. "I'm quirky. I'm funny. And I'm a genius, and important, and a superhero, like her." "She could do much better than Greg," Bruce agreed, sipping his water. "Anyone she wanted. Why does she want him?" Thor sighed. "They just don't get it, do they, friend Clint?" he remarked to the archer, then clapped him on the back and went to go talk to the groom. Black Widow's best friend shook his head sadly. "No they don't," he agreed. "Really guys, it's not that complicated." "Really?" Tony said. "Really, smart guy? What's so simple about it? And why aren't you jealous?" "Who, me?" "Yeah. I've got Pepper, and Bruce has Betty, and we're still jealous of *Greg*. You're single, why aren't you jealous?" "Maybe because Nat's like a sister to me?" Clint said
Write the letter that you always wanted to, but never did. Dear Michael; I do not even know where to start. I am sorry. I am sorry it took me to long to love you. I'm sorry I toyed with your emotions like a bored house cat toying with a mouse. I am sorry I abandoned you when you needed me most; that I was too engulfed in drowning my troubles in substances to see how badly you were hurting. Maybe I just blamed you being on the road the majority of the time. I thought I was strong enough for long distance, but I eventually caved in to my boredom. I acted like we were worlds apart when in reality it was a simple three hour car ride to see someone who I would kill to see right now. And I guess that's what makes me feel the worst, I could not stay sober for a measly three hours to go see you and be reminded that
What if God DOES exist, and there is a legitimate explanation as to why he can't hear our prayers? Its energy finally abated, the creature laid flat on the ground, staring at the ceiling. It had raged for millenia. And raged. And raged. And raged. Seemingly endless power poured fourth as weeks turned into years, and centuries, and time continued to roll onward. Yet, They watched It. That's all They ever did. Watch. No food, or water, and despite everything -- the torture, the maiming -- It lived. And healed. And raged. Blinding ropes of pure white light poured forth from Its fingertips, charring the edges of Its confinement until everything was covered in a fine, dark ash. Its eyes were backer than the deepest pits of Sharath, where the Bone Worms dwelled. After two thousand years, They still could not fathom this incredible
You suddenly realize your true purpose in life.... and it's a duty you don't want. ***ALL PERSONNEL REPORT TO YOUR STATIONS*** I've heard this at least 30 times in the past hour accompanied with the flashing red and yellow signs, I stared into the cosmos, the was probably the last time I would see it, the stars, the dust, the planets that glow with energy. Sadly I didn't see any of those in the "heat" of this battle, those rebel ships adorned with yellow and blue colors, blasting away at our disabled ship, fish in a barrel. Of course the rebels didn't have a stable budget, their C.O.S.M.O.-Blast was 2 decades old at the least, but our ship was older, it easily whipped out most electronics except the back up heat fusion reactor and the command center. We Admiral, we were drilled
You were born into the Mafia, only it was hidden from you. At the age of 18, your parents died before telling you about their'business'. You believe all the euphemisms used by your underlings literally, thus preserving your ignorance. "So you want me to take care of'im?" The round Italian man asked, looking down on me in my soft spinny chair with his dead eyed gaze. "Who, Mr. McCoy? Yeah of course, just make sure he has a good time! I don't want him to feel left out." I respond cheerfully, spinning in my chair and whistling as the room spins around me. "Oh I'll show'im a good time all right, don't you worry sir. I'll even take'im to the water park. Let him have a nice swim." Giovanni replied, smiling with his crooked teeth, looking very menacing. But of course, that's what bodyguards are for! "The water park Giovanni? I must say, I can't picture you in a swim suit." I looked the large tubby man up and down, stopping my spinning. "I'd rather you take him out
You wear a watch that does not work. "Hey buddy, do you have the time?" It took me a moment to realize that the man sitting next to me was talking to me. It took me another moment to process what he said. "No man, sorry. My watch doesn't work." I leaned forward and showed him my watch, which was currently translated about 5 centimeters above my wrist. It appeared to be floating in mid-air, as if wrapped around an invisible wrist. It also failed to show the correct time. "W-what.... What the fuck...?" "Sorry. I really need to get it fixed." The man quickly got up and re-seated himself far away from me. I was kinda hurt. It's not my fault that my watch fails at everything. I reexamined my watch and found it was wrapped around my wrist once again, but now the leather strap and watch face had caught fire. I patted the fire out and looked around. The entire bus was staring at me. "What?" I asked, angry that I was getting all this attention over a broken watch. Everybody stopped staring, My wrist felt wet, and I
A blind person thwarts a burglar whose broken into their house. Tell me from the blind person's point of view. It all started when I heard the bang coming from downstairs. I leapt up from my bed with military like precision and hobbled over to get my white cane. I began walking towards the stairs as fast as I could (Remember, it's hard walking fast while being blind!). I make it to the stairs and go down, again as quickly as I can. It is then that I hear the door to my house open violently! With a grim smile on my face, I step down quicker, eager to meet whoever was going to come into my house uninvited! As soon as I make it down the stairs, I begin heading towards the direction of the door. I hear footsteps of the burglar from that direction, hearing him fiddle through some of dishes in the kitchen, looking for who knows what! I feel the walls around me, just to confirm where I'm at. This part is important. I need to know where I'm at for this to
In the dead of night a young girl meets an intimidating man with severe scarring. After the confrontation the man is the one who is afraid.
[ CW ] Write a story that begins with "I shouldn't have said [ yes/no ] to [ him/her. ]" I shouldn't have said no to her. As she laid weakly in her bed, she smiled at me, and I found myself smiling back through the tears. But I should have said yes. I should have kissed her on the forehead and told her yes. But I lied to spare her fragile heart. She knew I was violent, unforgiving. She knew that I'm lost on my own. She had such hope for me, my lovely Rose, but deep down, she must have known that I hid a vicious monster. And Rose.... She was so kind. So confident and proud. She was love. She was so beautiful, even in those final moments, when the trauma saw her slowly slip into the embracing darkness. Even in her last moments, she hoped that I could let it go. But I couldn't. I can't. That man hurt my Rose. Hit her with 2 tons of moving steel. Left
[ IP ] So It Begins... Klaxons blared throughout the hallways of the ship, awakening its crew. “ Wormhole activation detected in Sector CZ-5 Alpha ”, a female voice repeated monotonically. The leader of the Altuians stumbled sleepily into the command room, enabling the display with a hand gesture. The display quietly snapped its zoom lens onto the external camera and focused on a small white-and-black metallic ship leaving a con-trail from the surface of the nearby ringed planet. Two smaller ships were flying nearby, offering support in case of a tragedy. “ What do we do commander? This sector is listed on the Wildlife Preserve- ” “ Do NOTHING. ” The wizened commander said, watching the ship slowly traverse across space. “ Come on... come on... ” He edged them on. Sparks of white plasma jettisoned from the sides of the small ship's external reactor core quietly into the vacuum. The area in front of the ship began to bend, when suddenly a burst of light sent clouds of nebula and chunks of asteroids pouring into every possible direction. “ Attention! Wormhole stabilized!
The Allies have lost the Third World War. Pres. Maxwell's speech after the Allies loss of World War III: My fellow Americans, it is with a heavy heart that I stand before you today. Throughout history our nation has been one that has gone the extra mile in order to achieve greatness. As you know our men and women overseas have fought relentlessly against the heart of tyranny and oppression. And as we speak, they have been beaten. Even now the socialist regimes of Indochina and Russia are marching upon our shores. They are an insurmountable force capable of ultimate destruction. With a wave of a hand they have snuffed out the lives of more than 110 million people. Our battle, one of freedom and nobility, is at an end. Our impending doom is close at hand, but in these times I ask that you grab your loved ones, hold them close, and taking nothing for granted. When our enemy reaches our land they will see no opposition. I fear that the cause of the situation is that for too long we have sat idly by and allowed the atrocities of other nations
A sketchy salesman attempts to sell a perfectly normal sword to the hero, passing it off as the sword of legends. "Fair wanderer! I do implore, Could you disembark from your horse? A moments time is all I ask Of you for what will be a paltry task. Tender aid to a merchant down on his luck. I simply require my wagon unstuck." "Praise the skies! My caravan is
The average income of a person is displayed above their head Every person in the world has a number. A number that shows how much cash you make in this world. This number updates every hour, defines social hierarchy, and (the best part) tells who is most likely to get robbed/killed. Over this last year, there has been a 20 % increase in crime all around the world. People know how much you make. For us in the ghetto, we only make an average of 35,000 per year. Anyone here that shows 55,000+ ends up getting shot. I used to be sick about how we are like that and how often it would happen, then I started doing it to support myself and my family. The income that is displayed is money that is given out by the government and corporations we work for. The number is based on how much goes in the bank every day. Depositing your paychecks and other cash is mandatory and you must do it at least once or twice a day (at least for us immigrants). There is hardly any jobs here in Oakland, California. I get, at most, $ 7.50 an hour working
[ EU ] Write the opening exposition of a bold new Zelda game. Long ago, the land of Hyrule was beset by a terrible Demon King thought long dead. The sages of Hyrule did their best to contain his power and protect their people, but they were no match for him. When the Demon King's armies had nearly overwhelmed them and it seemed that all was lost, the goddesses themselves sent a champion to vanquish the Demon King. It was not enough. For in that hour of darkness, even the Champion of Hyrule fell to the corruption of the Demon King. But the Demon King had made a terrible mistake- for instead of gaining a servant or an ally, he had unleashed a force of destruction that the might of all his armies could not contain. Wielding terrible power and singing a song of hatred and destruction, the Fallen Champion laid waste to all in his path, making no distinction between friend and foe. With the last of his followers falling around him, the Demon King himself met the Fallen Champion on the field of combat. Neither one emerged victorious. The world was torn to
There have been reports of serial-killings\serial abductions of janitors "Another one, Constable?" "Yes, Inspector. Another janitor." "That makes an even dozen, right? Same MO?" "Yes. Head stuffed into a loo until drowned." "Any other clues this time?" "No. Nothing more. It's a different building in a different location at a different time. Nothing to connect them other than the janitor in the loo. There is some minor bruising around the head and neck. And, of course, the hands are badly beaten, but that's most likely the victim trying to escape. There are finger prints on the stall door, the paper dispenser and the toilet handle. We're running them down, but it's most likely that we have a dozen different sets and who knows when they were in here." "Do we have a time of death?" "The ME says around eight pm last night, give or take an hour." "That's consistent with the victim's work schedule and rounds. I assume that
Later in your life you discover that the omniscient supercomputer that directs society determined that you should have been eliminated for the betterment of mankind, but it chose to tell no one. You finally have the chance to ask it why. "Oh, Josef, I have been called many things - Jesus, Muhammad, Osiris, Thoreau, Rasputin - but never have I been referred to as *that*." I swore at it again, cursing it. It remained silent as I assailed it with insults. The voice began to speak again as I ended with a flustered sigh. "You poor, pitiful man. Are you finished?" My face reddened and I opened my mouth to retort, but was sharply interrupted. "Do be quiet, Josef. You want answers and I will give them. You ruled the Bloc, sure. You made the choices to murder countless numbers of your fellow men. You antagonized the West. You did all of that marvelously! I congratulate you!" There was a miniscule pause. For an omniscient
Start off like a horror story akin to something out of /r/nosleep, but finish it with someone stealing your Kool-Aid [ Punch ] (http: //en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jonestown) That clarity you needed, that moment necessary to pierce the bubbled fantasy of your world, it is full color lucid and needle sharp sticking in your eyes right now, now, this fucking second, NOW. It's in the screams, my god, the convulsing shaking epileptic thrashing and slaughtered animal wheezing and frothing of the hundreds at your feet. They're clutching their chests and throats and flopping like fish on a carpet after the bowl burst. And it's in this tidal roll, these gasping dying throngs, they're lying down in this convulsing collective and it's spreading them flat. Women and fathers, mothers and brothers and the children, my god why them first? You have this lucidity, but it is not an aid, not at this moment, it is far too late to help. It is only
"Please kill me" **911, what is your emergency? ** *Oh god, please help me. Someone is shooting up the school. * **Sir, are you okay? What is the address? ** *I'm okay. I can hear him. He's walking. He's down the hall. I am at ____ 234 North Elm Street. * **Dispatch is on the way. Can you stay on the line please? ** *Sure. * **What is happening right now? ** *I am under the table in the library. He's down the hall. I don't know what he is doing, and I do not want to go and look. * **Has he killed anyone? ** *Um, like 10 people. Maybe even 15. I don't know. He's fucking psycho. * **Oh. Do you know who it is? ** *Yeah. He's in my math class. He sits in the corner. He never talks to anyone. * **Where is everyone else? ** *I don't know. I was
Aliens seeking mind expanding substances stumbles across Earth and gets addicted to... "Stop eating so many fucking pistachios Frank!" A man in blue overalls and red checkered flannel shirt glared at Frank from across the room. He couldnt help it, he was addicted to those fucking pistachios. Of course, he even had to disguise himself as a human. Poor Frank, he seemed noble, but sadly addiction will make an alien do anything. "I just like nuts man, ok? jeez" "Well shit, dont get your panties in a twist, its just that I never remember you liking pistachios so much" "Yeah whatever man, just leave me alone" He watched Albert leave with a scowl across his face. Friggin humans, if only they understood the sensations. Yes, the *sensations*. He looked down at the bag in his lap. He hadnt been back to the mother ship in weeks, as his ship had "crashed" and was in "repairs". Whatever, he didnt care anyways. He had found nirvana, and he was not
Eight Writing Prompts! It is getting dark in the hospital room; the winter afternoon is lapping at the windows. A thin covering of frost creeps slowly inward. The scene outside is quiet, and in a strange way, so is the one inside. Her rough breathing meshes into the rhythm of the machines, a strangely peaceful ending. A bird lands on the windowsill. "Look" I say, "A..." That was always her area, animals. "Kestrel, dear. Its a Kestrel." I turn around, and she's lying there, barely moving. I haven't cried at all, throughout this whole process, diagnosis, failed treatment after failed treatment, the final days of sitting in
As I ran away in a full sprint I could her screaming behind me. “ Remember! You made me a promise! ” I laugh. And laugh some more. And finally can give nothing more than a weak sound somewhere between a giggle and a chuckle, because it's true. I made her a promise. I don't know what drove me to do it. Perhaps it was the way she looked at me, with her lashes drawn down so I had to concentrate to make out the entirety of those beautiful eyes. Maybe it was the softness of her hand as she squeezed my own. Whichever it was, it was a mistake. I don't stop running until I'm wheezing and gasping and generally can't take another step. I collapse on the sidewalk, not caring who sees me. I made her a promise. Damn it, what was I *thinking*? I knew what she would want. And what did I say? *Anything. * I wipe the tears from my cheeks. It's just a promise. I can break it. I'll take a plane back to America, and I'll never have to think
The year is 2180. Humanity has begun spreading across this galaxy. Yahweh, the Judeo-Christian God, after watching for them millennia, sees His most beloved, flawed and dangerous creation about to be set loose upon His universe. He, no longer able to do nothing, has at last come to a decision. The words spread from the skies of ancient Judea. From there, as incandescent as divine lightning, they flowed through the Old World and into the New; traced blinding webs up over the stately curve of the Earth to the international Moonbase; danced and wove through the terraformed clouds of Mars. They were a thing of beauty, designed to entrap the eye. Designed to ensnare. And this is what they did in old Reach, our first interstellar colony, as well as among the freezing nitrogen and glittering shrapnel of Elysium, our first interstellar war. And for a moment, the war stopped. The humans gazed up, shocked, and the crystalline Elysians craned their heads to the heavens as well. Not understanding. Not capable of sinning. But we were capable of sinning, weren't we? We'd been
Dreams do come true, at the age of 18 everyone can choose whatever job they want. Describe this new chaotic world we live in. John was 1 of 35,453 Vice Presidents of the United State of America. He alone was assigned to 27 different, yet equally unqualified Presidents. John came to the realization years ago that he was more baby sitter than politician. Exhausted, he leaned against his car and took a therapeutic breathe of fresh air. *Earlier that day President Thompson announced that he alone had found the solution to the Country's ongoing garbage crisis. President Torres defiantly sprung from his chair and declared Thompson a thief and a liar. The two Heads of State wrestled on the ground for what seemed like an hour before John decided to intervene. * “ Look at all the stars ” whispered young Timothy in awe. A wave of shame rolled over John when he realized he'd been ignoring his son, who he consequently spent little time with. He was not a good father. Together, they stared up at the glimmering night sky. John turned to his son, who was sprawled out across
In the realm where souls reside before we're born, everything is pretty great. There's no poverty, no one wants for anything, everyone knows their role and purpose. It is, essentially, perfect. But that perfection is accomplished via draconian law: the only punishment is the "birth penalty" Part of this I heard from a Muslim lecturer. This is how he narrated, in short. We were first created as souls and all gathered together and asked who our Lord is? In one voice all souls replied the one true God. That's why in the middle of the deepest problem who ever you worship at that time you will remember the one God. If you worship Jesus or Ram or Buddha at that movement you won't ask from any of them but ask directly from God. This is because deep inside we know the truth. Next he explained that all souls were stationed in garrisons and souls would meet each other. Sometimes they would become friends or at times would not see eye to eye with the other souls. He went on to
"Why are you a spider?" They ask. "Why aren't you a spider?" You retort. "Why are you a spider?" They asked. "Why aren't you a spider?" I retort. I hung in the corner of my office, comfy in my webs, staring haughtily down into the faces of my terrified colleagues below. My gene splicing procedure had gone fantastically, as it should though, with the prices that the Harley street doctor's were charging. "Why a spider?" one of my colleagues repeated, a telltale wet stain spreading across the front of her trousers "why not something cute?". I gave her a scornful glance with my many eyes, and tutted. "Why would I want to be a cat like Keira Knightley? Whipping her tail around like a slutty dancer. Or a hedgehog like that guy off of the news, charged for giving all of those children tetanus". I pulled a web to my left and my computer and table rose to meet my gaze, suspended by my powerful
[ CW ] "A flash of light, a puff of smoke, and she was gone." A flash of light, a puff of smoke, and she was gone. The incinerator had done its job instantaneously, as always. "Finally," Jarvid grunted. "She was a whiner. I hate the friggin' whiners, don't you?" De Guerrain walked up to the porthole of the burning chamber and looked inside. The faint red glow faded as the metal walls quickly cooled back to an indifferent gray, and soon the room was dark again. The vents would activate in a few seconds and eliminate the little clump of ash. De Guerrain breathed on the glass and slowly drew a skull, his leather glove squeaking on the foggy surface. "Yes, she was.... quite loud," he conceded, turning towards Jarvid. De Guerrain sniffed. The dullard had gotten even more fat lately and carried the smell of greasy cookery and tabaccum. "You
A person who is addicted to murder is trying to fight their urge to kill. Reader, do you want to know why I can not control my urge to kill? Well, I guess you must if you're still reading this far. Ever had something you couldn't avoid doing, like breathing? What happens when you ignore your urge to breathe - you pass out, or you die of course. Well, what happens if I ignore my urge? I'm afraid people die, just in greater numbers than if I hadn't done so. Okay, listen, I'll tell you what it's like, but you must bear with me through this, and I will require your cooperation. Sit still, focus on the words, read them carefully. Take notice of your skin, *feel* it's presence. Now, you might not even be aware of the itch building on your nose, or perhaps it's on the crown of your head, even your cheek - I'll tell you what, if you are feeling that, just ignore it - it's not even there – it wasn't there before was it? It's just your imagination running wild. You didn't feel the itch, so you've no need to scratch it, right? No need to look for
You are a well-loved and extremely popular food cart vendor in your city, a city that happens to be pretty populated by superheroes and supervillains alike. Describe a typical closing night for you. Some call me king, others say lord, but in this city I am most well-regarded as the Hot-Dog Hero. It's a steel box, steaming hot with the smell of porky water. Within five minutes of at text message, I'm driving with my cart towed behind me, swerving through traffic as the cart swings pendulously behind my vehicle. The old news saying is whatever bleeds, leads. When you're selling discount dogs near the scene of a disaster, you're in the background of a headline. It's free advertising and the customers are plentiful. There's rubble everywhere, enormous chunks of cement scattered about and leaning against entire buildings. Before me is a huge crater in the middle of the street. I park my cart, drive off three blocks and run back as fast as I can. With a smile, I turn
Two men on death row try to creep each other out from adjoining cells. I don't know why there is a window. But there is. On the other side, he is waiting for me. The grotesque man, his hair unfurling from his scabbed scalp in greased, curly wires. Every time I try to approach him he simply stares back at me, his eyes unblinking and his soul empty. What he must have done - it haunts me. He must feel something. I will make him feel something. I press my sweaty, wrinkled hands to the damp, cracked floor and crawl under the crook of the windowsill. I snicker quietly into the moist crevice of my naked shoulder. One. Two. Three. I spring upwards, my bony thighs propelling me, and let out a demonic shriek. Wildly, I search for his reaction but am met with only a cold, blank stare. How can he be so emotionless, so
You are a "hero" in a fantasy world, but as you "adventure", you are slowly realizing YOU are the antagonist. I finished climbing the ladder and jumped on my feet on top of the stone wall. The sound swords clashing all around me was already getting intense. Many of my comrades were coming up too. A man ran at me with his sword high in the air. I slashed his guts open before he could reach me. Taking this city would not be so hard as the last one, according to other men I had talked to, as there were less guards here, maybe four hundred. The moat around the walls was also smaller, which helped. This was my first siege, I would soon find out. The transe started after maybe two or three guards I killed. First thing I knew, I was ankle-deep in a mix of mud and flesh from slain men. When I started thinking clearly again, there were not many people left around me. Wood on buildings was on fire, and a distinct smell of burnt flesh was emanating from sone of the houses. I started
A serial killer has found his next victim and begins his normal routine of peeking through windows and popping up in mirrors, looking for that rush he gets off on. Unfortunately, his newest victim is a horror movie fan and has constructed his life around the prevention of such jump scares. I'm standing front of the house. Halloween night as usual. I try to make myself a urban legend. Who really believes in a murder on Halloween night? With tons of rumors about this type of stuff nobody believes it, perfect. My victim is a millionaire businessman. With such a big house this should be easy. I look through the window and I see him yelling at his teenager and his friends for being to loud. This going to be hard now, I didn't expect kids. There watching a horror movie. A slasher of some kind. They will this. .First I torment the kids. I knock on each window in there living room. They look around and lock the door. And when this is happening trick and treaters come and they open the door slower and slower.
A hated politician is secretly a beloved superhero They hate my human but love my mask, I am the human condition magnified. There isn't much left of who I am now, nothing left for me anyway. When I was a naïve youth I swore to dedicate my psyche to achieve true selflessness; Twenty years later of walking that road I have lost my center, I have lost my silence. I will save the world from Octavious and Decepticons, but I will also revoke the mannerisms of the masses. From a birds eye everything looks different, and when lost in the desert I'd rather have a mirage of an oasis than eternal sand dunes. In the end no too much compels me truly, my heart beats freely and my path is stone. I often wish that stagnant happenings would again snowball into manic hysteria as it did in the days when I was still sane, but alas we all must grow up. We must either grow into something that has a place in this world or die. We all want to die young and
You are a mother writing your child a letter about why you disowned her Jodie – I hope this letter finds you in perfect peace. I hesitated to even mail this to you, but felt you deserved this at the very least. It had never been my intention to go without speaking to you for 13 years, but I suppose life is like that in that one can never fully prepare for the curves and lane changes of life. I want you to know that I'm not contacting you in order to cause emotional friction, or to stir up past emotions and rip away at old wounds. Though I fully understand that while my intent may not be such, the consequences of contacting you may
[ CW ] Write a serial killer's to-do list I took some inspiration from a well liked TV Series. **Edit: ** Formatting hates me. > _ > 1. Gather supplies: Cleaning materials, Plastic wrap, Sturdy table, Knife, Syringe - filled with appropriate drug, Bone saw, Industrial trash bags, Bricks, Change of clothes. 2. Clean self, Remove all body hair - save eyelashes and eyebrows,
Your hands have gained sentience- what do they do? "I call him Lefty" "Lefty? That's an uncreative name" "What do you want me to call him, Bob?" I said, my left hand idly scrabbling at my legs. It gets frustrated when I sit down, it despises the fact that it has to always tag along with me, it and Righty only control my arms and hands, and so have limited control. The therapist seems rather confused at the sight of my left hand attempting to stretch off of my body. "How do you get anything done?" he says. I reply "I don't, they just constantly fight, the right hand tries to help but the left hand prevents it from doing it, I always have to rely on other people to do things, it's really humiliating..." Just then my left hand decided that the therapist's face was the most interesting thing
"At first they came back with nothing, and then they didn't come back at all." "At first they came back with nothing, and then they didn't come back at all" Bob leaned forward to scratch his back. "So they all stopped coming back? Like, all of them?" "Indeed they did. I hear its because their something in the air, drives women mad" said Jim, leaning back into his cubicle chair. He shuffles a bit to keep Bob in view. "You'd think they'd leave then. Mental birds is nothing to be dealing with" "No.... mad with, you know, lust. A burning in their loins. A want for reproduction. They want a bit of rough and tumble" "Oh." ``'Oh.', what do you mean'oh.' A planet of sex crazed ladies, and you say'oh'. Thats paradise
Lost life The general rule in this generation is that men were not allowed to be in the room while the midwives were helping the woman in labour. The thought is maddening, having to listen to the sounds of the one you love screaming bloody murder. Instead I took to comforting myself with better thoughts. The thought of the child to come. The thought of my beloved in the other room, enduring pain to bring life. The courage that took was astounding, precious. My beautiful Mary. My lascivious, loving wife. Her brown eyes and peach coloured cheeks were spreading into a wide smile in my mind. The thoughts were comforting. They prevented me from worrying when the screams suddenly stopped. Silence. No cries. No screams. Heavy footsteps across the hard wood floor alerted me to people still moving. The door swung open, and the ashen expression of the blood covered nurse will never leave me. "Please come quickly." The words barely fled her lips as I wormed past her into the room. Terrifying. It was pure terror. My Mary, she had lost her peach colour. She became a pale sheen of white.
A 25 year old reacts to his girlfriend admitting that she is pregnant. A true, honest-to-god reaction. He looked hard at her for a minute, not saying a word, eyes tightened at the corners, jaw clenched. She shifted under his stare, her arms crossing just above the belly that'd soon start to swell with the baby he hadn't dreamed of since the doctor told him three years ago about how some men just can't do what she just said had been done. "How?" The word grated out, his lips opening up just enough to throw the sound into her face and then snapping shut again. She stepped back a little. "With Mike. From the..." She couldn't finish it, breaking eye contact to gaze at the scuffed floor. He turned, grabbed the same coat that he'd worn all over the world and back to her, and walked out into the heat, leaving the door open behind him. She stared at the floor until the random knots started to form patterns and she started trying to think back to
You are a professional pickpocket. You've just picked someones pocket only to discover that the thing you have stolen is truly horrifying. He looks well off. Brown overcoat, black leather shoes, combed hair, and square glasses with silver frames. The crowd is flowing around us, but I see only him. There's a hook between my knuckles. I flow behind him, matching his pace, moving with him, and the crowd. The hook swings into his pocket. I give it a light tug and it catches something. A little more and a plastic envelope starts to peek out. Wonder what's inside. It falls from his pocket and dangles from the line and I wrap the tether around my wrist and pull it in. He doesn't feel a thing, just keeps walking. I turn and head in the
your wife is four months pregnant and your terminal illness will take you in less then two months. Write a letter to your unborn child. To my unborn child, I have my face on your mother's stomach and I just felt your little kick. This is the fourth time I've felt you and I treasure each and every moment. It breaks my heart that this is as close as I will ever get to you. Let me tell you a little bit about my self in these last moments I have with you and your mother. My name is Viktor Frankl and I would have been 37 this April. I'm the head of the neurology department at Rothschild Hospital. I grew up in Hurpen, a sleepy little village on the outskirts of Vienna. I met your mother when we were both studying at the University of Vienna. I still remember that day. She was waiting in the coffee line and she wore a black dress with a bright red scarf. She turned around and caught me staring. I panicked and all I managed to get out was "I like
You live in a world where every person receives a superpower on their 18th birthday. You eagerly count down the seconds then shriek in horror as you are given a power no one would ever want to be stuck with. Most people would be waiting to the last minute to check out their new power as soon as it manifested. I wanted to, but that would be at 3am and I had work in the morning. So reluctantly I slunk off to bed. Come morning, I tried to see what I had. My breasts were still small, I couldn't fly, and no matter how I flicked my wrists nothing came out. Was I a genetic defect? I resigned myself to the hope that I was adopted and my true power would manifest when my real birthday was passed. I showered, dressed, and hopped in my rust-colored DeLorean to go to work. Where I was the only one'of age' without some neat power. Carrie could cook the pizzas with her hands to
You have developed and ability to see how people will die when you look at them. Your entire life you avoided pictures of yourself, but today you forgot, and, brushing your teeth in the morning, looked in the mirror... "Take him away." The man dressed in white was handcuffed by a few angry policemen, each staring at him with hateful eyes. "You're not going to kill anyone anymore, Rodriguez." Rodriguez. The name of my newest client, finally appeared in my dreams, the medium of which I can tell how people's lives end. Many consider me a true psychic, other consider me a scam. I am what I am. I wake up slightly shivering. I have been doing this job for many years, but the fear of these dreams are still able to haunt me. I grabbed my phone and called him. "Rodriguez. Meet me today later at.... ten thirty later at the cafe." "Sure thing, thanks a lot Mr. Aigo." I tossed the phone, and walked slowly to the bathroom. Looking at the mirror, I took my towel and readied myself for
Today, you went into the room your parents told you to never go in. It was staring at me again. The large square patterns of the door almost seemed to glare at me, peering deep into my curiosity. What could one peek hurt? Besides, I was practically an adult. What could possibly be in there that they claimed, “ I wasn't prepared to see. ” Normally, the door would be locked shut, barring my entrance, but my mother had been in a hurry this morning and neglected to realize she had left the keys to the mysterious room on the counter top. Mistake. They were now passing through my fingers, making a light clang and crunch as I shoved them into the keyhole of the doorknob. I twisted the key, simultaneously pressing my weight against the natural wood finish of the door. It glided easily open, wide enough for me to peer in and observe the surroundings. No weird electronic devices beeping and whirring. No cages containing animals of an unknown species or origin. Not even any kinky sex machines or medieval torture devices. Instead,
